glucocorticoids. In other words, even in the absence of stress, they
showed signs of chronically activating the stress response. The same is
observed in primates ranging from rhesus monkeys to lemurs. Same for
hamsters, guinea pigs, wolves, rabbits, and pigs. Even fish. Even sugar
gliders, whatever they are. In a pair of unintentional studies of captive
monkeys in which subordinate individuals were basically subordinated to
death, such animals had extensive damage to the hippocampus, a brain
region very sensitive to the damaging effects of glucocorticoid excess.18
My own work with baboons in Africa showed the same (being the
first such studies of wild primates). In general, low-ranking male
baboons had elevated basal glucocorticoid levels. When something
stressful did occur, their glucocorticoid stress response was relatively
sluggish. When the stressor was over, their levels returned to that
elevated baseline more slowly. In other words, too much of the stuff in
the bloodstream when you don’t need it, and too little when you do.
Remarkably, at the nuts-and-bolts level of brain, pituitary, and adrenals,
the elevated basal glucocorticoid levels of a subordinate occurred for the
same reasons as the elevated levels in humans with major depression.
For a baboon, social subordination resembles the learned helplessness of
depression.
Excessive glucocorticoids get you into trouble in various ways,
helping explain why chronic stress makes you sick. Subordinate baboons
paid a price in other realms as well. They had (a) elevated blood pressure
and a sluggish cardiovascular response to a stressor; (b) lower levels of
“good” HDL cholesterol; (c) subtle immune impairments, a higher
frequency of getting sick and slower wound healing; (d) a testicular
system more easily disrupted by stress than that of dominant males; and
(e) lower circulating levels of a key growth factor. Try not to be a
subordinate baboon.
Chickens and eggs reappear—does a particular physiological
attribute contribute to rank, or the reverse? This is impossible to
determine in wild animals, but in captive primate populations the
distinctive physiological features of a rank generally follow, rather than
precede, the establishment of the rank.19
At that point I’d happily proclaim that these findings reflected the
nature of Hierarchy, with a capital H, and of the stressfulness of social
subordination. Which turned out to be totally wrong.
438