aggressive than others—but only in circumstances of social exclusion.
Thus the effects of this genetic variant can be understood only by
considering other, nongenetic factors in individuals’ lives, such as
childhood adversity and adult provocation.47
The Dopamine System
Chapter 2 introduced the role of dopamine in the anticipation of
reward and in goal-directed behavior. Lots of work has examined the
genes involved, most broadly showing that variants that produce lowered
dopamine signaling (less dopamine in the synapse, fewer dopamine
receptors, or lower responsiveness of these receptors) are associated with
sensation seeking, risk taking, attentional problems, and extroversion.
Such individuals have to seek experiences of greater intensity to
compensate for the blunted dopamine signaling.
Much of the research has focused on one particular dopamine
receptor; there are at least five kinds (found in different parts of the
brain, binding dopamine with differing strengths and duration), each
coded for by a gene.48 Work has focused on the gene for the D4
dopamine receptor (the gene is called DRD4), which mostly occurs in
the neurons in the cortex and nucleus accumbens. The DRD4 gene is
super variable, coming in at least ten different flavors in humans. One
stretch of the gene is repeated a variable number of times, and the
version with seven repeats (the “7R” form) produces a receptor protein
that is sparse in the cortex and relatively unresponsive to dopamine. This
is the variant associated with a host of related traits—sensation and
novelty seeking, extroversion, alcoholism, promiscuity, less sensitive
parenting, financial risk taking, impulsivity, and, probably most
consistently, ADHD (attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder).
The implications cut both ways—the 7R could make you more likely
to impulsively steal the old lady’s kidney dialysis machine, or to
impulsively give the deed of your house to a homeless family. In come
gene/environment interactions. For example, kids with the 7R variant are
less generous than average. But only if they show insecure attachment to
their parents. Secure-attachment 7Rs show more generosity than average.
Thus 7R has something to do with generosity—but its effect is entirely
context dependent. In another study 7R students expressed the least
255