Sharks versus the Jets: Differing sorts of people living in close
proximity rub, and thus abrade, elbows regularly. One side’s act
of proud cultural identification feels like a hostile dig to the other
side, public spaces become proving grounds for turf battles,
commons become tragedies.
Surprise: both outcomes occur; the final chapter explores
circumstances where intergroup contact leads to one rather than the
other. Most interesting at this juncture is the importance of the spatial
qualities of the heterogeneity. Consider a region filled with people from
Elbonia and Kerplakistan, two hostile groups, each providing half the
population. At one extreme, the land is split down the middle, each
group occupying one side, producing a single boundary between the two.
At the other extreme is a microcheckerboard of alternating ethnicities,
where each square on the grid is one person large, producing a vast
quantity of boundaries between Elbonians and Kerplakis.
Intuitively, both scenarios should bias against conflict. In the
condition of maximal separation, each group has a critical mass to be
locally sovereign, and the total length of border, and thus of the amount
of intergroup elbow rubbing, is minimized. In the scenario of maximal
mixing, no patch of ethnic homogeneity is big enough to foster a self-
identity that can dominate a public space—big deal if someone raises a
flag between their feet and declares their square meter to be the Elbonian
Empire or a Kerplakistani Republic.
But in the real world things are always in between the two extremes,
and with variation in the average size of each “ethnic patch.” Does patch
size, and thus amount of border, influence relations?
This was explored in a fascinating paper from the aptly named New
England Complex Systems Institute, down the block from MIT.49 The
authors first constructed an Elbonian/Kerplaki mixture, with individuals
randomly distributed as pixels on a grid. Pixels were given a certain
degree of mobility plus a tendency to assort with other pixels of the same
type. As self-assortment progresses, something emerges—islands and
peninsulas of Elbonians amid a sea of Kerplakis, or the reverse, a
condition that intuitively seems rife with potential intergroup violence.
As self-assortment continues, the number of such isolated islands and
peninsulas declines. The intermediate stage that maximizes the number
299