group, and the personality traits that filter the perception of those
variables. What about humans?
And Us
A smidgen of neurobiology research has examined differences in
how people feel about hierarchy. Back to a concept from the last chapter,
social-dominance orientation (SDO), the measure of how much people
value power and prestige. In one study subjects viewed someone in
emotional pain. As reviewed in chapter 2, this activates the anterior
cingulate cortex and insular cortex—empathy, and disgust at the
circumstance that evoked the pain. The higher someone’s SDO score, the
less activation of those two regions. Those with the most interest in
prestige and power seem least likely to feel for those less fortunate.23
What about the biological correlates of a human having a particular
rank? In some ways we’re more subtle than other primates; in others, far
less so.
Two studies examined high-status individuals in government or the
military (in the latter case, officers up to the level of colonel). As
compared with low-status controls, these folks had lower basal
glucocorticoid levels, less self-reported anxiety, and an enhanced sense
of control (this telling us nothing, however, as to which came first—the
rank or the unstressed profile).24
Baboons redux. But something subtler was happening. The authors
deconstructed high rank with three questions: (a) How many people
ranked lower than the subject in his organization? (b) How much
autonomy did he have (e.g., to hire and fire)? (c) How many people did
he directly supervise? And high rank came with low glucocorticoids and
anxiety only insofar as the position was about the first two variables—
lots of subordinates, lots of authority. In contrast, having to directly
supervise lots of subordinates did not predict those good outcomes.
This gives credence to executives’ bellyaching about how they aren’t
supervising eleventy people; instead they have eleventy bosses. To
accrue the full physiological benefits of high status, don’t supervise
people; instead, glide through the workplace like a master of the universe
while minions whom you never interact with smile obsequiously. It’s not
just rank; it’s what rank means and entails.
441