The chapter on morality considers automaticity in a more important
realm. Is resisting lying a demanding task for your frontal cortex, or is it
effortless habit? As we’ll see, honesty often comes more easily thanks to
automaticity. This helps explain the answer typically given after
someone has been profoundly brave. “What were you thinking when you
dove into the river to save that drowning child?” “I wasn’t thinking—
before I knew it, I had jumped in.” Often the neurobiology of
automaticity mediates doing the hardest moral acts, while the
neurobiology of the frontal cortex mediates working hard on a term
paper about the subject.
The Frontal Cortex and Social Behavior
Things get interesting when the frontal cortex has to add social
factors to a cognitive mix. For example, one part of the monkey PFC
contains neurons that activate when the monkey makes a mistake on a
cognitive task or observes another monkey doing so; some activate only
when it’s a particular animal who made the mistake. In a neuroimaging
study humans had to choose something, balancing feedback obtained
from their own prior choices with advice from another person. Different
PFC circuits tracked “reward-driven” and “advice-driven” cogitating.49
Findings like these segue into the central role of the frontal cortex in
social behavior.50 This is appreciated when comparing various primates.
Across primate species, the bigger the size of the average social group,
the larger the relative size of the frontal cortex. This is particularly so
with “fission-fusion” species, where there are times when subgroups split
up and function independently for a while before regrouping. Such a
social structure is demanding, requiring the scaling of appropriate
behavior to subgroup size and composition. Logically, primates from
fission-fusion species (chimps, bonobos, orangutans, spider monkeys)
have better frontocortical inhibitory control over behavior than do non-
fission-fusion primates (gorillas, capuchins, macaques).
Among humans, the larger someone’s social network (measured by
number of different people texted), the larger a particular PFC subregion
(stay tuned).51 That’s cool, but we can’t tell if the big brain region causes
the sociality or the reverse (assuming there’s causality). Another study
resolves this; if rhesus monkeys are randomly placed into social groups,
54