Similarly, repeatedly show subjects a picture of a face accompanied
by a shock; soon, seeing the face alone activates the amygdala.9 As
shown by Elizabeth Phelps of NYU, such “fear conditioning” occurs
faster for other-race than same-race faces. Amygdalae are prepared to
learn to associate something bad with Them. Moreover, people judge
neutral other-race faces as angrier than neutral same-race faces.
So if whites see a black face shown at a subliminal speed, the
amygdala activates.10 But if the face is shown long enough for conscious
processing, the anterior cingulate and the “cognitive” dlPFC then
activate and inhibit the amygdala. It’s the frontal cortex exerting
executive control over the deeper, darker amygdaloid response.
Second depressing finding: subliminal signaling of race also affects
the fusiform face area, the cortical region that specializes in facial
recognition.11 Damaging the fusiform, for example, selectively produces
“face blindness” (aka prosopagnosia), an inability to recognize faces.
Work by John Gabrieli at MIT demonstrates less fusiform activation for
other-race faces, with the effect strongest in the most implicitly racist
subjects. This isn’t about novelty—show a face with purple skin and the
fusiform responds as if it’s same-race. The fusiform isn’t fooled
—“That’s not an Other; it’s just a ‘normal’ Photoshopped face.”
In accord with that, white Americans remember white better than
black faces; moreover, mixed-race faces are remembered better if
described as being of a white rather than a black person. Remarkably, if
mixed-race subjects are told they’ve been assigned to one of the two
races for the study, they show less fusiform response to faces of the
arbitrarily designated “other” race.12
Our attunement to race is shown in another way, too.13 Show a video
of someone’s hand being poked with a needle, and subjects have an
“isomorphic sensorimotor” response—hands tense in empathy. Among
both whites and blacks, the response is blunted for other-race hands; the
more the implicit racism, the more blunting. Similarly, among subjects of
both races, there’s more activation of the (emotional) medial PFC when
considering misfortune befalling a member of their own race than of
another race.
This has major implications. In work by Joshua Correll at the
University of Colorado, subjects were rapidly shown pictures of people
holding either a gun or a cell phone and were told to shoot (only) gun
toters. This is painfully reminiscent of the 1999 killing of Amadou
86