Jean Decety, who did such research, this demonstrates that “empathic
arousal [was] moderated early in information processing by a priori
attitudes toward other people.”19 In other words, cognitive processes
serve as a gatekeeper, deciding whether a particular misfortune is worthy
of empathy.
It is also a cognitive task to resonate with pain that is less overt—for
example, there is more engagement of the dmPFC when observing
someone in emotional pain than physical pain. Likewise when the pain is
presented more abstractly—a signal on a screen indicating that
someone’s hand has been stuck with a needle versus the act itself being
shown. Resonating with someone else’s pain is also a cognitive task
when it is a type of pain that you haven’t experienced. “Well, I suppose I
can understand the disappointment of this militia leader when he was
passed over for the chance to carry out the ethnic cleansing—kinda like
when I lost the election in kindergarten to be president of the random-
act-of-kindness club.” Now, that takes cognitive work. In one study
subjects considered people suffering from a neurological disorder
involving a novel type of pain sensitivity; empathizing for that novel
pain involved more frontal cortical activation than for more conventional
pain.20
As we saw, the rudimentary “empathy” of rodents is contingent,
depending on whether the other individual is a cagemate or a stranger.21
It is an enormous cognitive task for humans to overcome that, to reach an
empathic state for someone who is different, unappealing. A hospital
chaplain once described to me how he has to actively make sure that he
is not preferentially visiting patients who were “YAVIS”—young,
attractive, verbal, intelligent, or social. This is straight out of Us versus
Them—recall Susan Fiske’s work showing how extreme out-group
members, such as the homeless or addicts, are processed differently in
the frontal cortex than other people. And it is also straight out of Josh
Greene’s tragedy of the commons versus tragedy of the commonsense
morality, where acting morally toward an Us is automatic, while doing
so for a Them takes work.
The ease of empathizing with people like us starts at the level of
autonomic building blocks of empathy—in one study of ritual fire
walkers in Spain, heart rate changes in the walkers synchronized with
spectators—but only those who were relatives. In line with that
distinction, taking the perspective of a loved one in pain activates the
532