Back to the theme introduced in chapter 2 of the frontal cortex, and
the dlPFC in particular, getting you to do the harder thing when it’s the
right thing to do. And in our value-free sense of “right,” you’d expect the
dlPFC to activate when you’re struggling to do (a) the morally right
thing, which is to avoid the temptation to lie, as well as (b) the
strategically right thing, namely, once having decided to lie, doing it
effectively. It can be hard to deceive effectively, having to think
strategically, carefully remember what lie you’re actually saying, and
create a false affect (“Your Majesty, I bring terrible, sad news about your
son, the heir to the throne [yeah, we ambushed him—high fives!]”).*
Thus activation of the dlPFC will reflect both the struggle to resist
temptation and the executive effort to wallow effectively in the
temptation, once you’ve lost that struggle. “Don’t do it” + “if you’re
going to do it, do it right.”
This confusion arises in neuroimaging studies of compulsive liars.*39
What might one expect? These are people who habitually fail to resist
the temptation of lying; I bet they have atrophy of something
frontocortical. These are people who habitually lie and are good at it
(and typically have high verbal IQs); I bet they have expansion of
something frontocortical. And the studies bear out both predictions—
compulsive liars have increased amounts of white matter (i.e., the axonal
cables connecting neurons) in the frontal cortex, but lesser amounts of
gray matter (i.e., the cell bodies of the neurons). It’s not possible to know
if there’s causality in these neuroimaging/behavior correlates. All one
can conclude is that frontocortical regions like the dlPFC show multiple
and varied versions of “doing the harder thing.”
You can dissociate the frontal task of resisting temptation from the
frontal task of lying effectively by taking morality out of the equation.40
This is done in studies where people are told to lie. (For example,
subjects are given a series of pictures; later they are shown an array of
pictures, some of which are identical to ones in their possession, and
asked, “Is this a picture you have?” A signal from the computer indicates
whether the subject should answer honestly or lie.) In this sort of
scenario, lying is most consistently associated with activation of the
dlPFC (along with the nearby and related ventrolateral PFC). This is a
picture of the dlPFC going about the difficult task of lying effectively,
minus worrying about the fate of its neuronal soul.
514