Well, maybe the castration wasn’t perfect, you missed some bits of
testes. Or maybe enough of the minor adrenal androgens are secreted to
maintain the aggression. But no—even when testosterone and androgens
are completely eliminated, some aggression remains. Thus, some male
aggression is testosterone independent.*
This point is driven home by castration of some sexual offenders, a
legal procedure in a few states.1 This is accomplished with “chemical
castration,” administration of drugs that either inhibit testosterone
production or block testosterone receptors.* Castration decreases sexual
urges in the subset of sex offenders with intense, obsessive, and
pathological urges. But otherwise castration doesn’t decrease recidivism
rates; as stated in one meta-analysis, “hostile rapists and those who
commit sex crimes motivated by power or anger are not amenable to
treatment with [the antiandrogenic drugs].”
This leads to a hugely informative point: the more experience a male
had being aggressive prior to castration, the more aggression continues
afterward. In other words, the less his being aggressive in the future
requires testosterone and the more it’s a function of social learning.
On to the next issue that lessens the primacy of testosterone: What do
individual levels of testosterone have to do with aggression? If one
person has higher testosterone levels than another, or higher levels this
week than last, are they more likely to be aggressive?
Initially the answer seemed to be yes, as studies showed correlation
between individual differences in testosterone levels and levels of
aggression. In a typical study, higher testosterone levels would be
observed in those male prisoners with higher rates of aggression. But
being aggressive stimulates testosterone secretion; no wonder more
aggressive individuals had higher levels. Such studies couldn’t
disentangle chickens and eggs.
Thus, a better question is whether differences in testosterone levels
among individuals predict who will be aggressive. And among birds,
fish, mammals, and especially other primates, the answer is generally no.
This has been studied extensively in humans, examining a variety of
measures of aggression. And the answer is clear. To quote the British
endocrinologist John Archer in a definitive 2006 review, “There is a
weak and inconsistent association between testosterone levels and
aggression in [human] adults, and . . . administration of testosterone to
volunteers typically does not increase their aggression.” The brain
100