A FINAL CHALLENGE LACED WITH
POLITICS: IS EVERYTHING ADAPTIVE?
A
s we’ve seen, variants of genes that make organisms more adapted
to their environment increase in frequency over time. But what
about the reverse—if a trait is prevalent in a population, must it mean
that it evolved in the past because it was adaptive?73
“Adaptationism” assumes this is typically the case; an adaptationist
approach is to determine whether a trait is indeed adaptive and, if so,
what the selective forces were that brought it about. Much of
sociobiological thinking is adaptationist in flavor.
This was subject to scathing criticism by the likes of Stephen Jay
Gould and Harvard geneticist Richard Lewontin, who mocked the
approach as “just so” stories, after Kipling’s absurdist fantasies about
how certain traits came to be: how the elephant got its trunk (because of
a tug-of-war with a crocodile), how the zebra got its stripes, how the
giraffe got a long neck. So why not, supposedly ask the sociobiologists
in this critique, how the baboon male got big cojones while the gorilla
male got little ones? Observe a behavior, generate a just-so story that
assumes adaptation, and the person with the best just-so story wins. How
the evolutionary biologist got his tenure. In their view, sociobiological
standards lack rigor. As one critic, Andrew Brown, stated, “The problem
was that sociobiology explained too much and predicted too little.”74
According to Gould, traits often evolve for one reason and are later
co-opted for another use (fancy term: “exaptation”); for example,
feathers predate the evolution of bird flight and originally evolved for
insulation.75 Only later did their aerodynamic uses become relevant.
Similarly, the duplication of a gene for a steroid hormone receptor (as
mentioned many chapters ago) allowed one copy to randomly drift in its
DNA sequence, producing an “orphan” receptor with no use—until a
novel steroid hormone was synthesized that happened to bind to it. This
haphazard, jury-rigged quality evokes the aphorism “Evolution is a
tinkerer, not an inventor.” It works with whatever’s available as selective
pressures change, producing a result that may not be the most adaptive
384