John Wingfield of the University of California at Davis, and colleagues,
the idea is that rising testosterone levels increase aggression only at the
time of a challenge. Which is precisely how things work.
The explains why basal levels of testosterone have little to do with
subsequent aggression, and why increases in testosterone due to puberty,
sexual stimulation, or the start of mating season don’t increase
aggression either.15
But things are different during challenges.16 Among various
primates, testosterone levels rise when a dominance hierarchy first forms
or undergoes reorganization. Testosterone rises in humans in both
individual and team sports competition, including basketball, wrestling,
tennis, rugby, and judo; there’s generally a rise in anticipation of the
event and a larger one afterward, especially among winners.*
Remarkably, watching your favorite team win raises testosterone levels,
showing that the rise is less about muscle activity than about the
psychology of dominance, identification, and self-esteem.
Most important, the rise in testosterone after a challenge makes
aggression more likely.17 Think about this. Testosterone levels rise,
reaching the brain. If this occurs because someone is challenging you,
you head in the direction of aggression. If an identical rise occurs
because days are lengthening and mating season is approaching, you
decide to fly a thousand miles to your breeding grounds. And if the same
occurs because of puberty, you get stupid and giggly around that girl
who plays clarinet in the band. The context dependency is
remarkable.*18
The challenge hypothesis has a second part to it. When testosterone
rises after a challenge, it doesn’t prompt aggression. Instead it prompts
whatever behaviors are needed to maintain status. This changes things
enormously.
Well, maybe not, since maintaining status for, say, male primates
consists mostly of aggression or threats of it—from slashing your
opponent to giving a “You have no idea who you’re screwing with”
stare.19
And now for some flabbergastingly important research. What
happens if defending your status requires you to be nice? This was
explored in a study by Christoph Eisenegger and Ernst Fehr of the
University of Zurich.20 Participants played the Ultimatum Game
(introduced in chapter 2), where you decide how to split money between
104