why is summarized in the following example of a classically liberal
approach to a legal issue.
It’s the middle of the 1500s. Perhaps because of lax societal
standards and people being morally deprived and/or depraved, Europe is
overrun with witches. It’s a huge problem—people fear going out at
night; polls show that peasants-in-the-street list “witches” as more of a
threat than “the plague” or “the Ottomans”; would-be despots gain
supporters by vowing to be tough on witches.
Fortunately, there are three legal standards for deciding if someone is
guilty of witchcraft:8
The flotation test. Since witches reject the sacrament of
baptism, water will reject their body. Take the accused,
bound, and toss them into some water. If they float,
they’re a witch. If they sink, they’re innocent. Quickly
now, retrieve innocent person.
The devil’s-spot test. The devil enters someone’s body
to infect them with witch-ness, and that point of entry is
left insensitive to pain. Systematically do something
painful to every spot on the accused’s body. If some spot
is much less sensitive to pain than the rest, you’ve found
a devil’s spot and identified a witch.
The tear test. Tell the accused the story of the crucifixion
of Our Lord. Anyone not moved to tears is a witch.
These well-established criteria allow authorities fighting this witch
wave to identify and suitably punish thousands of witches.
In 1563 a Dutch physician named Johann Weyer published a book,
De Praestigiis Daemonum, advocating reform of the witch justice
system. He, of course, acknowledged the malign existence of witches,
the need to punish them sternly, and the general appropriateness of
witch-fighting techniques like those three tests.
However, Weyer aired an important caveat pertinent to older female
witches. Sometimes, he noted, elderly people, especially women, have
had atrophy of their lachrymal glands, making it impossible to cry tears.
Uh-oh—this raises the specter of false convictions of people as witches.
The concerned, empathic Weyer counseled, “Make sure you’re not
584