great, next the zoologists will report that Rafiki persuaded Simba to
become the Lion King—and now often emphasize definitions of culture
that cut chimps and other hoi polloi out of the party. There’s a fondness
for the thinking of Alfred Kroeber, Clyde Kluckhohn, and Clifford
Geertz, three heavyweight social anthropologists who focused on how
culture is about ideas and symbols, rather than the mere behaviors in
which they instantiate, or material products like flint blades or iPhones.
Contemporary anthropologists like Richard Shweder have emphasized a
more affective but still human-centric view of culture as being about
moral and visceral versions of right and wrong. And of course these
views have been critiqued by postmodernists for reasons I can’t begin to
follow.
Basically, I don’t want to go anywhere near these debates. For our
purposes we’ll rely on an intuitive definition of culture that has been
emphasized by Frans de Waal: “culture” is how we do and think about
things, transmitted by nongenetic means.
Working with that broad definition, is the most striking thing about
the array of human cultures the similarities or the differences? Depends
on your taste.
If the similarities seem most interesting, there are plenty—after all,
multiple groups of humans independently invented agriculture, writing,
pottery, embalming, astronomy, and coinage. At the extreme of
similarities are human universals, and numerous scholars have proposed
lists of them. One of the lengthiest and most cited comes from the
anthropologist Donald Brown.8 Here’s a partial list of his proposed
cultural universals: the existence of and concern with aesthetics, magic,
males and females seen as having different natures, baby talk, gods,
induction of altered states, marriage, body adornment, murder,
prohibition of some type of murder, kinship terms, numbers, cooking,
private sex, names, dance, play, distinctions between right and wrong,
nepotism, prohibitions on certain types of sex, empathy, reciprocity,
rituals, concepts of fairness, myths about afterlife, music, color terms,
prohibitions, gossip, binary sex terms, in-group favoritism, language,
humor, lying, symbolism, the linguistic concept of “and,” tools, trade,
and toilet training. And that’s a partial list.
For the purposes of this chapter, the staggeringly large cultural
differences in how life is experienced, in resources and privileges
available, in opportunities and trajectories, are most interesting. Just to
271