predicts how much outrage you feel and how much revenge you take.
This is all about sociality—the insula and amygdala don’t activate if it’s
a computer that has stabbed you in the back.
The insula activates when we eat a cockroach or imagine doing so.
And the insula and amygdala activate when we think of the neighboring
tribe as loathsome cockroaches. As we’ll see, this is central to how our
brains process “us and them.”
And finally, the amygdala gets tons of inputs from the frontal cortex.
Much more to come.
SOME OUTPUTS FROM THE AMYGDALA
Bidirectional connections. As we’ll see, the amygdala talks to many of the
regions that talk to it, including the frontal cortex, insula, periaqueductal
gray, and sensory projections, modulating their sensitivity.
The amygdala/hippocampus interface. Naturally, the amygdala talks to other
limbic structures, including the hippocampus. As reviewed, typically the
amygdala learns fear and the hippocampus learns detached, dispassionate
facts. But at times of extreme fear, the amygdala pulls the hippocampus
into a type of fear learning.29
Back to the rat undergoing fear conditioning. When it’s in cage A, a
tone is followed by a shock. But in cage B, the tone isn’t. This produces
context-dependent conditioning—the tone causes fearful freezing in cage
A but not in cage B. The amygdala learns the stimulus cue—the tone—
while the hippocampus learns about the contexts of cage A versus B. The
coupled learning between amygdala and hippocampus is very focalized
—we all remember the view of the plane hitting the second World Trade
Center tower, but not whether there were clouds in the background. The
hippocampus decides whether a factoid is worth filing away, depending
on whether the amygdala has gotten worked up over it. Moreover, the
coupling can rescale. Suppose someone robs you at gunpoint in an alley
in a bad part of town. Afterward, depending on the circumstance, the gun
can be the cue and the alley the context, or the alley is the cue and the
bad part of town the context.
Motor outputs. There’s a second shortcut regarding the amygdala,
specifically when it’s talking to motor neurons that command
movement.30 Logically, when the amygdala wants to mobilize a behavior
—say, fleeing—it talks to the frontal cortex, seeking its executive
approval. But if sufficiently aroused, the amygdala talks directly to
46