fetuses secrete estrogen. Thus female fetal brains are
bathed in estrogen. Why doesn’t that masculinize the
female fetal brain? Most likely it’s because fetuses make
something called alpha-fetoprotein, which binds
circulating estrogen, taking it out of action. So neither
Mom’s estrogen nor fetal-derived estrogen masculinizes
the brain in female fetuses. And it turns out that unless
there is testosterone and anti-Müllerian hormone around,
fetal mammalian brains automatically feminize.63
Now for the übermessy complication. What exactly is a
“female” or “male” brain? This is where the arguments
begin.
To start, male brains merely consistently drool reproductive
hormones out of the hypothalamus, whereas female brains must master
the cyclic secretion of ovulatory cycles. Thus fetal life produces a
hypothalamus that is more complexly wired in females.
But how about sex differences in the behaviors that interest us? The
question is, how much of male aggression is due to prenatal
masculinizing of the brain?
Virtually all of it, if we’re talking rodents. Work in the 1950s by
Robert Goy of the University of Wisconsin showed that in guinea pigs an
organizational effect of perinatal testosterone is to make the brain
responsive to testosterone in adulthood.64 Near-term pregnant females
would be treated with testosterone. This produced female offspring who,
as adults, appeared normal but were behaviorally “masculinized”—they
were more sensitive than control females to an injection of testosterone,
with a greater increase in aggression and male-typical sexual behavior
(i.e., mounting other females). Moreover, estrogen was less effective at
eliciting female-typical sexual behavior (i.e., a back-arching reflex called
lordosis). Thus prenatal testosterone exposure had masculinizing
organizational effects, so that these females as adults responded to the
activational effects of testosterone and estrogen as males would.
This challenged dogma that sexual identity is due to social, not
biological, influences. This was the view of sociologists who hated high
school biology . . . and of the medical establishment as well. According
to this view, if an infant was born with sexually ambiguous genitalia
(roughly 1 to 2 percent of births), it didn’t matter which gender they
214