Us/Them-ing is readily framed cognitively. John Jost of NYU has
explored one domain of this, namely the cognitive cartwheels of those on
top to justify the existing system’s unequal status quo. Cognitive
gymnastics also occur when our negative, homogeneous view of a type
of Them must accommodate the appealing celebrity Them, the Them
neighbor, the Them who has saved our ass—“Ah, this Them is different”
(no doubt followed by a self-congratulatory sense of open-
mindedness).31
Cognitive subtlety can be needed in viewing Thems as threats.32
Being afraid that the Them approaching you will rob you is rife with
affect and particularism. But fearing that those Thems will take our jobs,
manipulate the banks, dilute our bloodlines, make our children gay, etc.,
requires future-oriented cognition about economics, sociology, political
science, and pseudoscience.
Thus Us/Them-ing can arise from cognitive capacities to generalize,
imagine the future, infer hidden motivations, and use language to align
these cognitions with other Us-es. As we saw, other primates not only
kill individuals because they are Thems but have negative associations
about them as well. Nonetheless, no other primate kills over ideology,
theology, or aesthetics.
Despite the importance of thought in Us/Them-ing, its core is
emotional and automatic.33 In the words of Berreby in his book,
“Stereotyping isn’t a case of lazy, short-cutting cognition. It isn’t
conscious cognition at all.” Such automaticity generates statements like
“I can’t put my finger on why, but it’s just wrong when They do that.”
Work by Jonathan Haidt of NYU shows that in such circumstances,
cognitions are post-hoc justifications for feelings and intuitions, to
convince yourself that you have indeed rationally put your finger on
why.
The automaticity of Us/Them-ing is shown by the speed of the
amygdala and insula in making such dichotomies—the brain weighing in
affectively precedes conscious awareness, or there never is conscious
awareness, as with subliminal stimuli. Another measure of the affective
core of Them-ing is when no one even knows the basis of a prejudice.
Consider the Cagots, a minority in France whose persecution began in
the eleventh century and continued well into the last one.34 Cagots were
required to live outside villages, dress distinctively, sit separately in
church, and do menial jobs. Yet they didn’t differ in appearance, religion,
403