The conservative need for predictability and structure obviously fuels
the emphases on loyalty, obedience, and law and order.40 It also gives
insights into a puzzling feature of the political landscape: how is it that
over the last fifty years, Republicans have persuaded impoverished white
Americans to so often vote against their own economic self-interest? Do
they actually believe that they’re going to win the lottery and then get to
enjoy the privileged side of American inequality? Nah. The
psychological issues of needing structured familiarity show that for poor
whites, voting Republican constitutes an implicit act of system
justification and risk aversion. Better to resist change and deal with the
devil that you know. Harking back to the last chapter, gay conservatives
show more implicit antigay biases than do gay liberals. Better to hate
who you are, if that bolsters a system whose stability and predictability
are sources of comfort.
Intertwined with these variables is the Left/Right difference in
tendency to see things as threatening, particularly when conservatism is
anchored in authoritarianism. Life is filled with ambiguity, most of all
with the novel future, and if those make you anxious, lots of things will
seem threatening. Now, a “threat” can be abstract, such as to your self-
esteem; there are few political differences in the perception of such
threats. The differences concern concrete threats to your keister.
This helps explain political stances—“I have a list here of two
hundred communist spies working in the State Department” is a pretty
good demonstration of imagined threat.* The difference in threat
perception can be apolitical. In one study subjects had to rapidly do a
task when a word flashed up on a screen. Authoritarian conservatives,
but not liberals, responded more rapidly to threatening words like
“cancer,” “snake,” or “mugger” than to nonthreatening words (e.g.,
“telescope,” “tree,” “canteen”). Moreover, as compared with liberals,
such conservatives are more likely to associate “arms” with “weapons”
(rather than with “legs”), more likely to interpret ambiguous faces as
threatening, and more easily conditioned to associate negative (but not
positive) stimuli with neutral stimuli. Republicans report three times as
many nightmares as do Democrats, particularly ones involving loss of
personal power. As the saying goes, a conservative is a liberal who has
been mugged.
Related to this is “terror-management theory,” which suggests that
conservatism is psychologically rooted in a pronounced fear of death;
452