of the U.S. census, “Mexican” and “Armenian” were classified as
distinctive races; southern Italians were of a different race from northern
Europeans; someone with one black great-grandparent and seven white
ones was classified as white in Oregon but not Florida. This is race as a
cultural rather than biological construct.48
Given facts like these, it is not surprising that racial Us/Them
dichotomies are frequently trumped by other classifications. The most
frequent is gender. Recall the finding that it is more difficult to
“extinguish” a conditioned fear association with an other- than a same-
race face. Navarrete has shown that this occurs only when the
conditioned faces are male; gender outweighs race as an automatic
classification in this case.* Age as a classification readily trumps race as
well. Even occupation can—for example, in one study white subjects
showed an automatic preference for white politicians over black athletes
when they were primed to think of race, but the opposite when primed to
think of occupation.49
Race as a salient Us/Them category can be shoved aside by subtle
reclassification. In one study subjects saw pictures of individuals, each
black or white, each associated with a statement, and then had to recall
which face went with which statement.50 There was automatic racial
categorization—if subjects misattributed a quote, the face picked and the
one actually associated with the statement were likely to be of the same
race. Next, half the black and half the white individuals pictured wore
the same distinctive yellow shirt; the other half wore gray. Now subjects
most often confused faces by shirt color.
Wonderful research by Mary Wheeler and Susan Fiske of Princeton
showed how categorization is shifted, studying the phenomenon of
amygdala activation by pictures of other-race faces.51 In one group
subjects tried to find a distinctive dot in each picture. An other-race face
didn’t activate the amygdala; face-ness wasn’t being processed. In a
second group subjects judged whether each face looked older than some
age. Amygdaloid responses to other-race faces enlarged—thinking
categorically about age strengthened thinking categorically about race. In
a third group a vegetable was displayed before each face; subjects judged
whether the person liked that vegetable. The amygdala didn’t respond to
other-race faces.
At least two interpretations come to mind to explain this last result:
410