Thanksgiving turkey drawing (silly and perhaps a red flag—if it keeps
happening, maybe complain to the principal); (d) “competition”—whose
deity is more worth killing for? (try to avoid).
But the biggest reason for the definitional challenge was emphasized
in the introduction—these terms mean different things to scientists living
inside different disciplines. Is “aggression” about thought, emotion, or
something done with muscles? Is “altruism” something that can be
studied mathematically in various species, including bacteria, or are we
discussing moral development in kids? And implicit in these different
perspectives, disciplines have differing tendencies toward lumping and
splitting—these scientists believe that behavior X consists of two
different subtypes, whereas those scientists think it comes in seventeen
flavors.
Let’s examine this with respect to different types of “aggression.”2
Animal behaviorists dichotomize between offensive and defensive
aggression, distinguishing between, say, the intruder and the resident of a
territory; the biology underlying these two versions differs. Such
scientists also distinguish between conspecific aggression (between
members of the same species) and fighting off a predator. Meanwhile,
criminologists distinguish between impulsive and premeditated
aggression. Anthropologists care about differing levels of organization
underlying aggression, distinguishing among warfare, clan vendettas,
and homicide.
Moreover, various disciplines distinguish between aggression that
occurs reactively (in response to provocation) and spontaneous
aggression, as well as between hot-blooded, emotional aggression and
cold-blooded, instrumental aggression (e.g., “I want your spot to build
my nest, so scram or I’ll peck your eyes out; this isn’t personal,
though”).3 Then there’s another version of “This isn’t personal”—
targeting someone just because they’re weak and you’re frustrated,
stressed, or pained and need to displace some aggression. Such third-
party aggression is ubiquitous—shock a rat and it’s likely to bite the
smaller guy nearby; a beta-ranking male baboon loses a fight to the
alpha, and he chases the omega male;* when unemployment rises, so do
rates of domestic violence. Depressingly, as will be discussed in chapter
4, displacement aggression can decrease the perpetrator’s stress hormone
levels; giving ulcers can help you avoid getting them. And of course
21