defect—that’s two years. But maybe defect, in case he cooperates . . .”
Round and round.*
If you play PD once, there is a rational solution. If you, prisoner A,
defect, your sentence averages out to one year (zero years if B
cooperates, two years if B defects); if you cooperate, the average is two
years (one year if B cooperates, three years if B defects). Thus you
should defect. In single-round versions of PD, it’s always optimal to
defect. Not very encouraging for the state of the world.
Suppose there are two rounds of PD. The optimal strategy for the
second round is just like in a single-round version—always defect. Given
that, the first-round defaults into being like a single-round game—and
thus, defect during it also.
What about a three-round game? Defect in the third, meaning that
things default into a two-round game. In which case, defect in the
second, meaning defect in the first.
It’s always optimal to defect in round Z, the final round. And thus it’s
always optimal to defect in round Z−1, and thus round Z−2. . . . In other
words, when two individuals play for a known number of rounds, the
optimal strategy precludes cooperation.
But what if the number of rounds is unknown (an “iterated” PD)?
Things get interesting. Which is when the game theorists and biologists
met.
The catalyst was political scientist Robert Axelrod of the University
of Michigan. He explained to his colleagues how PD works and asked
them what strategy they’d use in a game with an unknown number of
rounds. The strategies offered varied enormously, with some being hair-
raisingly complicated. Axelrod then programmed the various strategies
and pitted them against each other in a simulated massive round-robin
tournament. Which strategy won, was most optimal?
It was provided by a mathematician at the University of Toronto,
Anatol Rapoport; as the mythic path-of-the-hero story goes, it was the
simplest strategy. Cooperate in the first round. After that, you do
whatever the other player did in the previous round. It was called Tit for
Tat. More details:
You cooperate (C) in the first round, and if the other player always
cooperates (C), you both happily cooperate into the sunset:
Example 1:
349