“unmaternal mothers, homosexuals and zombies” (quite the trio you’d
invite to dinner in the 1950s).48
The work was hugely influential, taught to psychologists, architects,
and urban planners; more than a million reprints were requested of
Calhoun’s original Scientific American report; sociologists, journalists,
and politicians explicitly compared residents of particular housing
projects and Calhoun’s rats. The take-home message sent ripples through
the American heartland destined for the chaotic sixties: inner cities breed
violence, pathology, and social deviance.
Calhoun’s rats were more complicated than this (something
underemphasized in his lay writing). High-density living doesn’t make
rats more aggressive. Instead it makes aggressive rats more aggressive.
(This echoes the findings that neither testosterone, nor alcohol, nor
media violence uniformly increases violence. Instead they make violent
individuals more sensitive to violence-evoking social cues.) In contrast,
crowding makes unaggressive individuals more timid. In other words, it
exaggerates preexisting social tendencies.
Calhoun’s erroneous conclusions about rats don’t even hold for
humans. In some cities—Chicago, for example, circa 1970—higher
population density in neighborhoods does indeed predict more violence.
Nevertheless, some of the highest-density places on earth—Hong Kong,
Singapore, and Tokyo—have miniscule rates of violence. High-density
living is not synonymous with aggression in rats or humans.
—
The preceding sections examined the effects of living with lots of people,
and in close quarters. How about the effects of living with different kinds
of people? Diversity. Heterogeneity. Admixture. Mosaicism.
Two opposite narratives come to mind:
Mister Rogers’ neighborhood: When people of differing
ethnicities, races, or religions live together, they experience the
similarities rather than the differences and view one another as
individuals, transcending stereotypes. Trade flows, fostering
fairness and mutuality. Inevitably, dichotomies dissolve with
intermarriage, and soon you’re happily watching your grandkid
in the school play on “their” side of town. Just visualize whirled
peas.
298