REAL VERSUS METAPHORICAL
SENSATION
T
hen there are ways in which we confuse literal with metaphorical
sensation.
A brilliant study by John Bargh of Yale concerned haptic sensations
(I had to look the word up—haptic: related to the sense of touch).
Volunteers evaluated the résumés of supposed job applicants; crucially,
the résumé was attached to a clipboard of one of two weights. When
subjects held the heavier clipboard, they tended to judge candidates as
more “serious” (while clipboard weight had no effect on other perceived
traits). When you next apply for a job, hope that your résumé will be
attached to a heavy clipboard. How else would the evaluator figure out
that you can appreciate the gravity of a situation and deal with weighty
matters, rather than being a lightweight?24
In the next study subjects assembled a puzzle with pieces that were
either smooth or rough as sandpaper, then observed a socially ambiguous
interaction. Handle the rough puzzle pieces and the interactions were
rated as less coordinated, smooth, or successful (it’s not clear, however,
if those subjects were more likely, at home that evening, to use coarse
language in describing their rough day).
Next, subjects sat in either a hard or a soft chair (to quote the authors,
“We primed subjects by the seat of their pants”). Sit in the former and
they were more likely to perceive individuals as stable and unemotional,
to be less flexible in economic game play. This is remarkable—haptic
sensations in your butt influencing whether you think someone is a hard-
ass. Or hard-hearted instead of a softie.
Similar intermixing of the real and the metaphorical occurs with
temperature sensation. In another study from Bargh’s group, the
researcher, hands full with something, would ask a subject to briefly hold
a cup of coffee for them. Half the subjects held warm coffee, half iced
coffee. Subjects then read about some individual and answered questions
about them. Subjects who held the warm cup rated the individual as
having a warmer personality (without altering ratings about other
566