CONCLUSIONS
A
ll things considered, it is a pretty remarkable thing that when an
individual is in pain, we (i.e., we humans, primates, mammals)
often are induced to be in a state of pain also. There have been some
mighty interesting twists and turns for that one to have evolved.
But at the end of the day, the crucial issue is whether an empathic
state actually produces a compassionate act, to avoid the trap of empathy
being an end unto itself. The gap between the state and the act can be
enormous, especially when the goal is for the act to be not only effective
but also pristine in its motives.
For someone reading this book, a first challenge in bridging that gap
is that much of the world’s suffering is felt by distant masses
experiencing things that we haven’t an inkling of—diseases that don’t
touch us; poverty that precludes clean water, a place to live, the certainty
of a next meal; oppression at the hands of political systems that we’ve
been spared; strictures due to repressive cultural norms that might as
well be from another planet. And everything about us makes those the
hardest scenarios for us to actually act—everything about our hominin
past has honed us to be responsive to one face at a time, to a face that is
local and familiar, to a source of pain that we ourselves have suffered.
Yes, best that our compassion be driven by the most need rather than by
the most readily shared pain. Nevertheless, there’s no reason why we
should expect ourselves to have particularly good intuitions when aiming
to heal this far-flung, heterogeneous world. We probably need to be a bit
easier on ourselves in this regard.
Likewise, we should perhaps ease up a bit on the scratching-an-
altruist problem. It has always struck me as a bit mean-spirited to
conclude that it is a hypocrite who bleeds. Scratch an altruist and, most
of the time, the individual with unpure motives who bleeds is merely the
product of “altruism” and “reciprocity” being evolutionarily inseparable.
Better that our good acts be self-serving and self-aggrandizing than that
they don’t occur at all; better that the myths we construct and propagate
about ourselves are that we are gentle and giving, rather than that we
549