there is the ghastly world of aggression that is neither reactive nor
instrumental but is done for pleasure.
Then there are specialized subtypes of aggression—maternal
aggression, which often has a distinctive endocrinology. There’s the
difference between aggression and ritualistic threats of aggression. For
example, many primates have lower rates of actual aggression than of
ritualized threats (such as displaying their canines). Similarly, aggression
in Siamese fighting fish is mostly ritualistic.*
Getting a definitional handle on the more positive terms isn’t easy
either. There’s empathy versus sympathy, reconciliation versus
forgiveness, and altruism versus “pathological altruism.”4 For a
psychologist the last term might describe the empathic codependency of
enabling a partner’s drug use. For a neuroscientist it describes a
consequence of a type of damage to the frontal cortex—in economic
games of shifting strategies, individuals with such damage fail to switch
to less altruistic play when being repeatedly stabbed in the back by the
other player, despite being able to verbalize the other player’s strategy.
When it comes to the more positive behaviors, the most pervasive
issue is one that ultimately transcends semantics—does pure altruism
actually exist? Can you ever separate doing good from the expectation of
reciprocity, public acclaim, self-esteem, or the promise of paradise?
This plays out in a fascinating realm, as reported in Larissa
MacFarquhar’s 2009 New Yorker piece “The Kindest Cut.”5 It concerns
people who donate organs not to family members or close friends but to
strangers. An act of seemingly pure altruism. But these Samaritans
unnerve everyone, sowing suspicion and skepticism. Is she expecting to
get paid secretly for her kidney? Is she that desperate for attention? Will
she work her way into the recipient’s life and do a Fatal Attraction?
What’s her deal? The piece suggests that these profound acts of goodness
unnerve because of their detached, affectless nature.
This speaks to an important point that runs through the book. As
noted, we distinguish between hot-blooded and cold-blooded violence.
We understand the former more, can see mitigating factors in it—
consider the grieving, raging man who kills the killer of his child. And
conversely, affectless violence seems horrifying and incomprehensible;
this is the sociopathic contract killer, the Hannibal Lecter who kills
without his heart rate nudging up a beat.*6 It’s why cold-blooded killing
is a damning descriptor.
22