And then, separate from that, in a concrete bunker tucked away in the
brain, sits a little man (or woman, or agendered individual), a
homunculus at a control panel. The homunculus is made of a mixture of
nanochips, old vacuum tubes, crinkly ancient parchment, stalactites of
your mother’s admonishing voice, streaks of brimstone, rivets made out
of gumption. In other words, not squishy biological brain yuck.
And the homunculus sits there controlling behavior. There are some
things outside its purview—seizures blow the homunculus’s fuses,
requiring it to reboot the system and check for damaged files. Same with
alcohol, Alzheimer’s disease, a severed spinal cord, hypoglycemic
shock.
There are domains where the homunculus and that brain biology stuff
have worked out a détente—for example, biology is usually
automatically regulating your respiration, unless you must take a deep
breath before singing an aria, in which case the homunculus briefly
overrides the automatic pilot.
But other than that, the homunculus makes decisions. Sure, it takes
careful note of all the inputs and information from the brain, checks your
hormone levels, skims the neurobiology journals, takes it all under
advisement, and then, after reflecting and deliberating, decides what you
do. A homunculus in your brain, but not of it, operating independently of
the material rules of the universe that constitute modern science.
That’s what mitigated free will is about. I see incredibly smart people
recoil from this and attempt to argue against the extremity of this picture
rather than accept its basic validity: “You’re setting up a straw
homunculus, suggesting that I think that other than the likes of seizures
or brain injuries, we are making all our decisions freely. No, no, my free
will is much softer and lurks around the edges of biology, like when I
freely decide which socks to wear.” But the frequency or significance
with which free will exerts itself doesn’t matter. Even if 99.99 percent of
your actions are biologically determined (in the broadest sense of this
book), and it is only once a decade that you claim to have chosen out of
“free will” to floss your teeth from left to right instead of the reverse,
you’ve tacitly invoked a homunculus operating outside the rules of
science.
This is how most people accommodate the supposed coexistence of
free will and biological influences on behavior.* For them, nearly all
discussions come down to figuring what our putative homunculus should
590