Anthropology doesn’t help either. Most cultures have allowed
polygyny. But within such cultures most people are (socially)
monogamous. But most of those men would presumably be polygamous
if they could buy more wives.
What about human sexual dimorphism? Men are roughly 10 percent
taller and 20 percent heavier than women, need 20 percent more calories,
and have life spans 6 percent shorter—more dimorphic than
monogamous species, less than polygamous ones. Likewise with subtle
secondary sexual characteristics like canine length, where men average
slightly longer canines than women. Moreover, compared with, say,
monogamous gibbons, human males have proportionately bigger testes
and higher sperm counts . . . but pale in comparison with polygamous
chimps. And back to imprinted genes, reflecting intersexual genetic
competition, which are numerous in tournament species and nonexistent
in pair-bonders. What about humans? Some such genes, but not many.
Measure after measure, it’s the same. We aren’t classically
monogamous or polygamous. As everyone from poets to divorce
attorneys can attest, we are by nature profoundly confused—mildly
polygynous, floating somewhere in between.*
Individual Selection
At first pass we seem like a great example of a species where the
driving force on behavior is maximizing reproductive success, where a
person can be an egg’s way of making another egg, where selfish genes
triumph. Just consider the traditional perk of powerful men: being
polygamous. Pharaoh Ramses II, incongruously now associated with a
brand of condoms, had 160 children and probably couldn’t tell any of
them from Moses. Within half a century of his death in 1953, Ibn Saud,
the founder of the Saudi dynasty, had more than three thousand
descendants. Genetic studies suggest that around sixteen million people
today are descended from Genghis Khan. And in recent decades more
than one hundred children each were fathered by King Sobhuza II of
Swaziland, Ibn Saud’s son King Saud, the dictator Jean-Bédel Bokassa
of the Central African Republic, plus various fundamentalist Mormon
leaders.52
The human male drive to maximize reproductive success is shown by
a key fact—the most common cause of individual human violence is
369