The mirroring can be quite abstract. It can be cross-modal—see
someone doing movement A, and some mirror neuron activates; hear the
sound of someone doing movement A, and the same occurs. And the
neurons can gestalt a scene, firing even if only part of the observed
movement is obscured.32
Most interesting, mirror neurons didn’t simply track movement. Find
a mirror neuron that responds to the sight of someone picking up a cup of
tea to drink. The sight of someone picking up the tea to clear the table
doesn’t activate it. In other words, mirror neurons can incorporate
intentionality into their response.
Thus mirror neuron activity correlates with circumstances of
imitation, either conscious or otherwise, including imitating the idea of
an action, as well as the intent behind it. Nevertheless, no one has
actually shown a causal relationship, that automatic or conscious
mimicry requires mirror neuron activation. Moreover, the mirror
neuron/imitation link is complicated by the cells having been first
identified in rhesus monkeys—a species that does not show imitation of
behavior.
But assuming that mirror neurons are indeed involved, the question
becomes what purpose mimicry serves. Various possibilities have been
raised and debated.
—
Probably the least controversial and most plausible is that mirror neurons
mediate motor learning by observation.33 Downsides of this theory,
though, are that (a) mirror neurons do their thing in species with minimal
learning by mimicry; (b) the amount of mirror neuron activity is
unrelated to the efficacy with which observational learning of
movements occurs; (c) to the extent that mirror neurons are needed for
types of observational learning, it’s a pretty low-level contribution in
humans—after all, while we do learn how to carry out certain motoric
acts by observation, far more interesting is our learning of context by
observation—when to carry out that behavior (for example,
observational learning may teach a subordinate primate the motoric
features of kowtowing, but far more demanding and important is
learning whom to kowtow to).
Related to that is the idea of mirror neurons aiding learning from
another person’s experience.34 If you observe someone biting into food
536