anxiety, pain, disgust, sadness. Soon afterward her PFC activates
as rationalizations kick in—“This is just a stupid game; I have
friends; my dog loves me.” And the amygdala et al. quiet down.
And what if you do the same to someone whose frontal cortex is
not fully functional? The amygdala is increasingly activated; the
person feels increasingly distressed. What neurological disease is
involved? None. This is a typical teenager.
Finally, the PFC mediates fear extinction. Yesterday the rat
learned, “That tone is followed by a shock,” so the sound of the
tone began to trigger freezing. Today there are no shocks, and the
rat has acquired another truth that takes precedence—“but not
today.” The first truth is still there; as proof, start coupling tone
with shock again, and freezing to tone is “reinstated” faster than
the association was initially learned.
Where is “but not today” consolidated? In the PFC, after receiving
information from the hippocampus.67 The medial PFC activates
inhibitory circuits in the BLA, and the rat stops freezing to the tone. In a
similar vein but reflecting cognition specific to humans, condition people
to associate a blue square on a screen with a shock, and the amygdala
will activate when seeing that square—but less so in subjects who
reappraise the situation, activating the medial PFC by thinking of, say, a
beautiful blue sky.
This segues into the subject of regulating emotion through thought.68
It’s hard to regulate thought (try not thinking about a hippo) but even
tougher with emotion; research by my Stanford colleague and close
friend James Gross has explored this. First off, “thinking differently”
about something emotional differs from simply suppressing the
expression of the emotions. For example, show someone graphic footage
of, say, an amputation. Subjects cringe, activate the amygdala and
sympathetic nervous system. Now one group is instructed to hide their
emotions (“I’m going to show you another film clip, and I want you to
hide your emotional reactions”). How to do so most effectively? Gross
distinguishes between “antecedent” and “response”-focused strategies.
Response-focused is dragging the emotional horse back to the barn after
it’s fled—you’re watching the next horrific footage, feeling queasy, and
62