arbitrary, like a bell, with a reward.7 As the association solidifies, is the
ringing bell still “just” a marker symbolizing impending pleasure, or
does it become pleasurable itself? Elegant work related to the
mesolimbic dopamine system shows that in a substantial subset of rats,
the arbitrary signal itself becomes rewarding. Similarly, an arbitrary
symbol of an Us core value gradually takes on a life and power of its
own, becoming the signified instead of the signifier. Thus, for example,
the scattering of colors and patterns on cloth that constitutes a nation’s
flag becomes something that people will kill and die for.*
The strength of Us/Them-ing is shown by its emergence in kids. By
age three to four, kids already group people by race and gender, have
more negative views of such Thems, and perceive other-race faces as
being angrier than same-race faces.8
And even earlier. Infants learn same-race faces better than other-race.
(How can you tell? Show an infant a picture of someone repeatedly; she
looks at it less each time. Now show a different face—if she can’t tell the
two apart, she barely glances at it. But if it’s recognized as being new,
there’s excitement, and longer looking).9
Four important thoughts about kids dichotomizing:
Are children learning these prejudices from their
parents? Not necessarily. Kids grow in environments
whose nonrandom stimuli tacitly pave the way for
dichotomizing. If an infant sees faces of only one skin
color, the salient thing about the first face with a
different skin color will be the skin color.
Racial dichotomies are formed during a crucial
developmental period. As evidence, children adopted
before age eight by someone of a different race develop
the expertise at face recognition of the adoptive parent’s
race.10
Kids learn dichotomies in the absence of any ill intent.
When a kindergarten teacher says, “Good morning, boys
and girls,” the kids are being taught that dividing the
world that way is more meaningful than saying, “Good
morning, those of you who have lost a tooth and those of
you who haven’t yet.” It’s everywhere, from “she” and
“he” meaning different things to those languages so
394