northern India, Tibet, and Nepal, where the polyandry is “adelphic” (aka
“fraternal”)—a woman marries all the brothers of one family, from the
strapping young man to his infant brother.*20
—
A challenging implication of kin selection arises.
Those hot cousins. If one accrues fitness benefits by helping relatives
pass on copies of their genes, why not help them do that by mating with
them? Yech; inbreeding produces decreased fertility and those genetic
unpleasantnesses in European royalty.*21 So the dangers of inbreeding
counter the kin-selection advantages. Theoretical models suggest that the
optimal balance is third-cousin matings. And indeed, numerous species
prefer to mate with between a first and a third cousin.22
This occurs in insects, lizards, and fish, where, on top of that, cousin-
mating pairs invest more in the rearing of their offspring than do
unrelated parents. A preference for cousin matings occurs in quail,
frigate birds, and zebra finches, while among pair-bonded barn swallows
and ground tits, females sneak out on their partner to mate with cousins.
Similar preferences occur in some rodents (including the Malagasy giant
jumping rat, a species that sounds disturbing even without cousins
shacking up with each other).23
And what about humans? Something similar. Women prefer the smell
of moderately related over unrelated men. And in a study of 160 years of
data concerning every couple in Iceland (which is a mecca for human
geneticists, given its genetic and socioeconomic homogeneity), the
highest reproductive success arose from third- and fourth-cousin
marriages.24
Recognizing Relatives?
These findings concerning kin selection require animals to recognize
degrees of relatedness. How do they do this?
Some species have innate recognition. For example, place a mouse in
an arena; at one end is an unrelated female, at the other, a full sister from
a different litter, never encountered before. The mouse spends more time
with the sister, suggesting genetically based kin recognition.
343