late again; the train was delayed” being assessed as more plausible and
forgivable than “Sorry I’m late again; a meteorite hit my driveway
again”).
Another solution to Tit for Tat’s signal-error vulnerability is to use a
shifting strategy. At the beginning, in an ocean of heterogeneous
strategies, many heavily biased toward defection, start with Tit for Tat.
Once they’ve become extinct, switch to Forgiving Tit for Tat, which
outcompetes Tit for Tat when signal errors occur. What is this transition
from hard-assed, punitive Tit for Tat to incorporating forgiveness?
Establishing trust.
Other elaborations simulate living systems. The computer scientist
John Holland of the University of Michigan introduced “genetic
algorithms”—strategies that mutate over time.
Another real-world elaboration was to factor in the “cost” of certain
strategies—for example, with Tit for Tat, the costs of monitoring for and
then punishing cheating—costly alarm systems, police salaries, and jail
construction. These are superfluous in a world of no signal errors and
nothing but Tit for Tat–ers, and Tit for Tat can be replaced by the cheaper
Always Cooperate.
Thus, when there are signal errors, differing costs to different
strategies, and the existence of mutations, a cycle emerges: a
heterogeneous population of strategies, including exploitative,
noncooperative ones, are replaced by Tit for Tat, then replaced by
Forgiving Tit for Tat, then by Always Cooperate—until a mutation
reintroduces an exploitative strategy that spreads like wildfire, a wolf
among Always Cooperate sheep, starting the cycle all over again. . . .*36
More and more modifications made the models closer to the real world.
Soon the computerized game strategies were having sex with each other,
which must have been the most exciting thing ever for the
mathematicians involved.
The evolutionary biologists were delighted to generate increasingly
sophisticated models with the theoretical economists and theoretical
diplomats and theoretical war strategists. The real question was whether
animal behavior actually fits any of these models.
One bizarre animal system suggests Tit for Tat enforcement of
cooperation involving the black hamlet fish, which form stable pair-
bonds.37 Nothing strange there. The fish can change sex (something that
occurs in some fish species). As per usual, reproduction is more
353