nevertheless, today roughly 20 percent of its people are slaves, and the
government has prosecuted a total of one slave owner.1 I recognize that
little has changed in many places; I have spent decades in Africa living
around people who believe that epileptics are possessed and that the
organs of murdered albinos have healing powers, where beating of
wives, children, and animals is the norm, five-year-olds herd cattle and
haul firewood, pubescent girls are clitoridectomized and given to old
men as third wives. Nonetheless, worldwide, things have improved.
The definitive account of this is Pinker’s monumental The Better
Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined.2 It’s a scholarly
work that’s gut-wrenchingly effective in documenting just how bad
things once were. Pinker graphically describes the appalling historical
inhumanity of humans. Roughly half a million people died in the Roman
Colosseum to supply audiences of tens of thousands the pleasure of
watching captives raped, dismembered, tortured, eaten by animals.
Throughout the Middle Ages, armies swept across Eurasia, destroying
villages, killing every man, consigning every woman and child to
slavery. Aristocracy accounted for a disproportionate share of violence,
savaging peasantry with impunity. Religious and governmental
authorities, ranging from Europeans to Persians, Chinese, Hindus,
Polynesians, Aztecs, Africans, and Native Americans, invented means of
torture. For a bored sixteenth-century Parisian, entertainment might
consist of a cat burning, execution of a “criminal” animal, or bearbaiting,
where a bear, chained to a post, would be torn apart by dogs. It is a
sickeningly different world; Pinker quotes the writer L. P. Hartley: “The
past is a foreign country: they do things differently there.”
Better Angels has provoked three controversies:
Why Were People So Awful Then?
For Pinker the answer is clear. Because people had always been so
awful. This is chapter 9’s debate—when was war invented, was ancestral
hunter-gatherer life about Hobbes or Rousseau? As we saw, Pinker is in
the camp holding that organized human violence predates civilization,
stretching back to our last common ancestor with chimps. And as
reviewed, most experts convincingly disagree, suggesting that data have
been cherry-picked, hunter-horticulturalists mislabeled as hunter-
617