RNA determines protein.* And implicit in that central dogma is another
critical point: one type of gene specifies one type of protein.
Just for everyone’s sanity, I’m going to mostly ignore RNA. For our
purposes, what is interesting is what genes, the starting point, have to do
with their end products—proteins and their functions.
MUTATIONS AND POLYMORPHISMS
Genes are inherited from your parents (half the genes from each [not
entirely true, as covered in the main text]). Suppose that when someone’s
DNA genome is being copied for inclusion in their egg or sperm, a
mistake is made in the copying of one single nucleotide; with billions of
nucleotides, that’s bound to happen sometimes. As a result, unless
corrected, the gene, now with its nucleotide sequence erroneously
differing in one spot, is passed on to an offspring. This is a mutation.
In classical genetics there are three types of mutations that can occur.
The first is called a point mutation. One single nucleotide is copied
incorrectly. Will this change the amino acid sequence of the protein
coded for? It depends. Back to redundancy in the DNA code, from a few
paragraphs ago. Suppose there is a codon in a gene with the sequence
GCT, coding for alanine. But there has been a mutation, yielding GCA
instead. No problem—that still codes for alanine. It’s an inconsequential,
“neutral” mutation. But suppose the mutation instead was GAT. This
codes for a completely different amino acid called asparagine. Uh-oh.
In actuality, though, this may not be a big deal, if the new amino acid
looks a lot like the one that was lost. Suppose you have a nucleotide
sequence coding for the following metaphorical amino acid sequence:
“I/am/now/going/to/do/the/following”
Thanks to a subtle mutation, there is a change of one amino acid, but
one without a ton of consequences:
“I/am/now/going/ta/do/the/following”
This would still be comprehensible to most people; the protein would
merely be perceived as coming from New York. Translated into protein-
ese, the protein has a slightly different shape and does its usual task a bit
differently (maybe a little slower or faster). Not the end of the world.
714