testosterone have most of its fetal brain effects as
estrogen, interacting with the estrogen receptor? That
aspect of brain masculinization should have occurred
despite the mutation. Complicating things, some of the
masculinizing effects of prenatal testosterone in
monkeys don’t require conversion to estrogen. So we
have genetically and gonadally male individuals with at
least some brain masculinization raised successfully as
females.
The picture is complicated further—AIS individuals raised female
have higher-than-expected rates of being gay, and of having an other-
than-female or neither-female-nor-male-sex/gender self-identification.
Argh. All we can say is that there is (imperfect) evidence that
testosterone has masculinizing prenatal effects in humans, as in other
primates. The question becomes how big these effects are.
Answering that question would be easy if you knew how much
testosterone people were exposed to as fetuses. Which brings up a truly
quirky finding, one likely to cause readers to start futzing awkwardly
with a ruler.
Weirdly, prenatal testosterone exposure influences digit length.71
Specifically, while the second finger is usually shorter than the fourth
finger, the difference (the “2D:4D ratio”) is greater in men than in
women, something first noted in the 1880s. The difference is
demonstrable in third-trimester fetuses, and the more fetal testosterone
exposure (as assessed by amniocentesis), the more pronounced the ratio.
Moreover, CAH females have a more masculine ratio, as do females who
shared their fetal environment (and thus some testosterone) with a male
twin, while AIS males have a more feminine ratio. The sex difference in
the ratio occurs in other primates and rodents. And no one knows why
this difference exists. Moreover, this oddity is not alone. A barely
discernible background noise generated by the inner ear (“otoacoustic
emissions”) shows a sex difference that reflects prenatal testosterone
exposure. Go explain that.
The 2D:4D ratio is so variable, and the sex difference so small, that
you can’t determine someone’s sex by knowing it. But it does tell you
something about the extent of fetal testosterone exposure.
219