mine. I’d rather not actually scratch yours if I can get away with it. And
I’m watching you in case you try the same.”
Despite what you might expect from kin selection, unrelated animals
frequently cooperate. Fish swarm in a school, birds fly in formation.
Meerkats take risks by giving alarm calls that aid everyone, vampire bats
who maintain communal colonies feed one another’s babies.*30
Depending on the species, unrelated primates groom one another, mob
predators, and share meat.
Why should nonrelatives cooperate? Because many hands lighten the
load. School with other fish, and you’re less likely to be eaten
(competition for the safest spot—the center—produces what Hamilton
termed the “geometry of the selfish herd”). Birds flying in a V formation
save energy by catching the updraft of the bird in front (raising the
question of who gets stuck there).31 If chimps groom one another, there
are fewer parasites.
In a key 1971 paper biologist Robert Trivers laid out the evolutionary
logic and parameters by which unrelated organisms engage in
“reciprocal altruism”—incurring a fitness cost to enhance a nonrelative’s
fitness, with the expectation of reciprocation.32
It doesn’t require consciousness to evolve reciprocal altruism; back
to the metaphor of the airplane wing in the wind tunnel. But there are
some requirements for its occurrence. Obviously, the species must be
social. Furthermore, social interactions have to be frequent enough that
the altruist and the indebted are likely to encounter each other again. And
individuals must be able to recognize each other.
Amid reciprocal altruism occurring in numerous species, individuals
often attempt to cheat (i.e., to not reciprocate) and monitor attempts by
others to do the same to them. This raises the realpolitik world of
cheating and counterstrategies, the two coevolving in escalating arms
races. This is called a “Red Queen” scenario, for the Red Queen in
Through the Looking-Glass, who must run faster and faster to stay in
place.33
This raises two key interrelated questions:
Amid the cold calculations of evolutionary fitness, when
is it optimal to cooperate, when to cheat?
In a world of noncooperators it’s disadvantageous to be
the first altruist. How do systems of cooperation ever
347