shared goal, especially when it is successful. This revisits chapter 11—a
shared goal reprioritizes Us/Them dichotomies, bringing this novel
combined Us to the forefront.
Under those conditions, sustained intergroup contact generally
decreases prejudices, often to a large extent and in a generalized,
persistent manner. This was the conclusion of a 2006 meta-analysis of
some five hundred studies comprising over 250,000 subjects from thirty-
eight countries; beneficial effects were roughly equal for group
differences in race, religion, ethnicity, or sexual orientation. As
examples, a 1957 study concerning desegregation of the Merchant
Marines showed that the more trips white seamen took with African
Americans, the more positive their racial attitudes. Same for white cops
as a function of time spent with African American partners.19
A more recent meta-analysis provides additional insights: (a) The
beneficial effects typically involve both more knowledge about and more
empathy for the Thems. (b) The workplace is a particularly effective
place for contact to do its salutary thing. Decreased prejudice about the
Thems at work often generalizes to Thems at large, and even sometimes
to other types of Thems. (c) Contact between a traditionally dominant
group and a subordinate minority usually decreases prejudice more in the
former; the latter have higher thresholds. (d) Novel routes of interacting
—such as sustained online relationships—can work a bit as well.20
All good news. Contact theory has prompted an experimental
approach where people, most typically adolescents or young adults, from
groups in conflict are brought together for anything from one-hour
discussions to summer camps. They’ve most frequently involved
Palestinians and Israelis, Northern Irish Catholics and Protestants, or
opposing groups from the Balkans, Rwanda, or Sri Lanka, with the idea
that participants will return home and spread their attitudinal shifts. This
notion of germination prompted the name of one such program, Seeds of
Peace.
Group pictures show Muslims and Jews, Catholics and Protestants,
Tutsis and Hutu, Croats and Bosnians arm in arm; this is better than
puppies. Do the programs work? Depends on what counts as “working.”
According to one expert, Stephen Worchel of the University of Hawaii,
effects are generally positive—less fear and more positive views of
Thems, more of a perception of Thems as heterogeneous, more
628