As I said, additional mechanisms underlie LTP, and neuroscientists
debate which is most important (the one they study, naturally) in neurons
in organisms when they are actually learning. In general, the debate has
been whether pre- or the postsynaptic changes are more crucial.
After LTP came a discovery that suggests a universe in balance. This
is LTD—long-term “depression”—experience-dependent, long-term
decreases in synaptic excitability (and, interestingly, the mechanisms
underlying LTD are not merely the opposite of LTP). LTD is not the
functional opposite of LTP either—rather than being the basis of generic
forgetting, it sharpens a signal by erasing what’s extraneous.
A final point about LTP. There’s long term and there’s long term. As
noted, one mechanism underlying LTP is an alteration in glutamate
receptors so that they are more responsive to glutamate. That change
might persist for the lifetime of the copies of that receptor that were in
that synapse at the time of the LTPing. But that’s typically only a few
days, until those copies accumulate bits of oxygen-radical damage and
are degraded and replaced with new copies (similar updating of all
proteins constantly occurs). Somehow LTP-induced changes in the
receptor are transferred to the next generation of copies. How else can
octogenarians remember kindergarten? The mechanism is elegant but
beyond the scope of this chapter.
All this is cool, but LTP and LDP are what happens in the
hippocampus when you learn explicit facts, like someone’s phone
number. But we’re interested in other types of learning—how we learn to
be afraid, to control our impulses, to feel empathy, or to feel nothing for
someone else.
Synapses utilizing glutamate occur throughout the nervous system,
and LTP isn’t exclusive to the hippocampus. This was a traumatic
discovery for many LTP/hippocampus researchers—after all, LTP is
what occurred in Schopenhauer’s hippocampus when he read Hegel, not
what the spinal cord does to make you more coordinated at twerking.*
Nonetheless, LTP occurs throughout the nervous system.*3 For
example, fear conditioning involves synapses LTPing in the basolateral
amygdala. LTP underlies the frontal cortex learning to control the
amygdala. It’s how dopaminergic systems learn to associate a stimulus
with a reward—for example, how addicts come to associate a location
with a drug, feeling cravings when in that setting.
138