I’m not convinced that a Tit for Tat reciprocity has been clearly
demonstrated in other species. But evidence of its strict use would be
hard for Martian zoologists to document in humans—after all, there are
frequently pairs where one human does all the labor, the other doing
nothing other than intermittently handing him some green pieces of
paper. The point is that animals have systems of reciprocity with
sensitivity to cheating.
Gigantic Question #2: How Can Cooperation Ever
Start?
So a handful of Tit for Tat–ers can outcompete a mix of other
strategies, including highly exploitative, uncooperative ones, losing the
battles but winning the war. But what if there’s only one Tit for Tat–er in
a population of ninety-nine Always Defect–ers? Tit for Tat doesn’t stand
a chance. Always Defect–ers playing each other produces the second-
worst outcome for each. But a Tit for Tat–er playing an Always Defect–
er does worse, getting the sucker payoff that first round before becoming
a de facto Always Defect–er. This raises the second great challenge for
reciprocal altruism: forget which strategy is best at fostering cooperation
—how do you ever start any type? Amid a sea of Always Defect–ers, the
first black hamlet fish, mole rat, or Dictyostelium amoeba who, after
reading Gandhi, Mandela, Axelrod, and Hamilton, takes the first
altruistic step is screwed, lagging behind everyone else forever. One can
practically hear the Always Defect amoebas chortling derisively.
Let’s make it slightly easier for Tit for Tat to gain a foothold.
Consider two Tit for Tat–ers amid ninety-eight Always Defect–ers. Both
will crash and burn . . . unless they find each other and form a stable
cooperative core, where the Always Defect–ers either must switch to Tit
for Tat or go extinct. A nidus of cooperation crystallizes outward through
the population.
This is where green-beard effects help, conspicuous features of
cooperators that help them recognize one another. Another mechanism is
spatial, where the cooperative trait itself facilitates cooperators finding
one another.
Another route has been suggested for jump-starting reciprocal
altruism. Occasionally a geographic event occurs (say, a land bridge
355