while the subordinated are placated by the sops of respect. Supporting
this, across thirty-seven countries, higher levels of income inequality
correlate with more of the condescension of HL perceptions trickling
down. Jost has explored this in a related way, examining how myths of
“No one has it all” can reinforce the status quo. For example, the cultural
trope of “poor but happy”—the poor are more carefree, more in touch
with and able to enjoy the simple things in life—and the myth of the rich
as unhappy, stressed, and burdened with responsibility (think of
miserable, miserly Scrooge and those warm, loving Cratchits) are great
ways to keep things from changing. The trope of “poor but honest,” by
throwing a sop of prestige to Thems, is another great means of
rationalizing the system.*
Individual differences in how people feel about hierarchy help
explain variation in the extent of Them-ing. This is shown in studies
examining social-dominance orientation (SDO: how much someone
values prestige and power) and right-wing authoritarianism (RWA: how
much someone values centralized authority, the rule of law, and
convention).75 High-SDO individuals show the greatest increases in
automatic prejudices when feeling threatened; more acceptance of bias
against low-status out-groups; if male, more tolerance of sexism. And as
discussed, people high in SDO (and/or in RWA) are less bothered by
hostile humor about out-groups.
Related to our all being part of multiple Us/Them dichotomies is our
simultaneous membership in multiple hierarchies.76 No surprise, people
emphasize the importance of the hierarchy in which they rank highest—
being captain of the company’s weekend softball team takes on more
significance than the lousy, lowly nine-to-five job during the week.
Particularly interesting are hierarchies that tend to map onto Us/Them
categories (for example, when race and ethnicity overlap heavily with
socioeconomic status). In those cases, those on top tend to emphasize the
convergence of the hierarchies and the importance of assimilating the
values of the core hierarchy (“Why can’t they all just call themselves
‘Americans’ instead of ‘Ethnicity-Americans’?”). Interestingly, this is a
local phenomenon—whites tend to favor assimilationist, unitary
adherence to national values while African Americans favor more
pluralism; however, the opposite occurs concerning campus life and
policies among white and African American students at traditionally
423