interest in organizations advocating prosocial causes, unless they were
given a religious prime,* in which case they were the most prosocial.
One more—7Rs are worse at gratification-postponement tasks, but only
if they grew up poor. Repeat the mantra: don’t ask what a gene does; ask
what it does in a particular context.49
Interestingly, the next chapter considers the extremely varied
frequency of the 7R variant in different populations. As we’ll see, it tells
you a lot about the history of human migration, as well as about
differences between collectivist and individualist cultures.50
We shift now to other parts of the dopamine system. As introduced in
chapter 2, after dopamine binds to receptors, it floats off and must be
removed from the synapse.51 One route involves its being degraded by
the enzyme catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). Among the variants
of the COMT gene is one associated with a more efficient enzyme.
“More efficient” = better at degrading dopamine = less dopamine in the
synapse = less dopamine signaling. The highly efficient COMT variant is
associated with higher rates of extroversion, aggression, criminality, and
conduct disorder. Moreover, in a gene/environment interaction straight
out of the MAO-A playbook, that COMT variant is associated with anger
traits, but only when coupled with childhood sexual abuse. Intriguingly,
the variants seem pertinent to frontal regulation of behavior and
cognition, especially during stress.
In addition to degradation, neurotransmitters can be removed from
the synapse by being taken back up into the axon terminal for
recycling.52 Dopamine reuptake is accomplished by the dopamine
transporter (DAT). Naturally, the DAT gene comes in different variants,
and those that produce higher levels of synaptic dopamine (i.e.,
transporter variants that are less efficient) in the striatum are associated
with people who are more oriented toward social signaling—they’re
drawn more than average to happy faces, are more repelled by angry
faces, and have more positive parenting styles. How these findings
merge with the findings from the DRD4 and COMT studies (i.e., fitting
risk taking with a preference for happy faces) is not immediately
apparent.
Cool people with certain versions of these dopamine-related genes
are more likely to engage in all sorts of interesting behaviors, ranging
from the healthy to the pathological. But not so fast:
256