produce a behavior before the homunculus can rush back and hit that big
red button on the control panel.
Issues of getting to the red button in time intersect with issues of the
adolescent brain. A number of critics of Roper v. Simmons, starting with
O’Connor in her dissenting opinion, noted a seeming contradiction. The
American Psychological Association (APA) had filed an amicus curiae
brief in the case, emphasizing that adolescents (i.e., their brains) are so
immature that they can’t be held to adult criminal standards with
sentencing. Turns out that the same APA had filed a brief some years
earlier in a different case, emphasizing that adolescents are sufficiently
mature that they should be able to choose whether to have an abortion,
even without parental consent.
Well, that’s a bit awkward, and it sure makes the APA and its ilk
appear to be flip-flopping along ideological grounds, O’Connor charged.
Laurence Steinberg, whose research on adolescent brain development
was covered heavily in chapter 7 (and whose work was influential in the
Roper v. Simmons decision), offers a logical resolution.16 Deciding
whether to have an abortion involves logical reasoning about moral,
social, and interpersonal issues, stretching out over days to weeks. In
contrast, deciding whether to, say, shoot someone can involve issues of
impulse control over the course of seconds. The frontal immaturity of the
adolescent brain is more pertinent to split-second issues of impulse
control than to slow, deliberative reasoning processes. Or in a mitigated-
free-will framework, rapid-fire, impulsive behaviors can occur while the
homunculus has gone to the bathroom.
Causation and Compulsion
Some proponents of mitigated free will distinguish between the
concepts of “causation” and “compulsion.”17 In a way that feels a bit
nebulous, the former involves every behavior having been caused by
something, of course, but the latter reflects only a subset of behaviors
being really, really caused by something, something that compromises
rational, deliberative processes. In this view some behaviors are more
deterministically biological than others.
This has been relevant to schizophrenic delusions. Suppose someone
suffering from schizophrenia has auditory hallucinations, including a
594