metabolically costly for the female than the male. So the fish in a pair
take turns being the more expensive female. Say fish A and fish B have
been doing their sex-change tango, and most recently A was the
expensive female and B the cheap male. Suppose B cheats by staying
male, forcing A to continue as female; A switches to male and stays that
way until B regains his social conscience and becomes female.
Another widely cited study suggested a Tit for Tat strategy among
stickleback fish.38 The fish is in a tank, and on the other side of a glass
partition is something scary—a bigger cichlid fish. The stickleback
tentatively darts forward and back, investigating. Now put a mirror in its
tank, perpendicular to the axis of the two fish. In other words, thanks to
the mirror, there appears to be a second cichlid next to the first.
Terrifying, except from out of nowhere there’s this mysterious second
stickleback who checks out the second cichlid every time our hero
checks out the first—“I have no idea who this guy is, but we’re an
amazing, coordinated team.”
Now convince the stickleback his partner is defecting. Angle the
mirror so that the stickleback’s reflection is deflected backward. Now
when the fish darts forward, his reflection does as well, but—that jerk!—
it looks like he’s hanging back safely (lagging back even half a body
length decreases the likelihood of a fish being predated). When the fish
believes his partner is defecting, he stops darting forward.
Greater complexity in Tit for Tat–ing is suggested by some animals
having multiple roles in their social groups.39 Back to the playback
technique with lions, where the roar of a strange male emanated from a
speaker in the bushes (or from a life-sized model of a lion). Lions
tentatively came forward to investigate, a risky proposition. Consistently,
certain lions hung back. The toleration of these habitual scaredy-cats
seemed to violate the demands of reciprocity, until it was recognized that
such animals took the lead in other domains (e.g., in hunts). A similar
punch line emerges concerning the Damaraland mole rat. The social
groups of it and its relative, the naked mole rat, resemble those of social
insects, with nonreproductive workers and a single breeding queen.*
Researchers noted some workers who never worked and were
considerably fatter than the rest. It turns out that they have two
specialized jobs—during the rains, they dig through flooded, collapsed
tunnels of the burrows, and when necessary, they disperse with the risky
task of starting a new colony.
354