The interaction between “maybe” and the propensity for addictive
gambling is seen in a study of “near misses”—when two out of three
reels line up in a slot machine. In control subjects there was minimal
dopaminergic activation after misses of any sort; among pathological
gamblers, a near miss activated the dopamine system like crazy. Another
study concerned two betting situations with identical probabilities of
reward but different levels of information about reward contingencies.
The circumstance with less information (i.e., that was more about
ambiguity than risk) activated the amygdala and silenced dopaminergic
signaling; what is perceived to be well-calibrated risk is addictive, while
ambiguity is just agitating.97
Pursuit
So dopamine is more about anticipation of reward than about reward
itself. Time for one more piece of the picture. Consider that monkey
trained to respond to the light cue with lever pressing, and out comes the
reward; as we now know, once that relationship is established, most
dopamine release is anticipatory, occurring right after the cue.
What happens if the post–light cue release of dopamine doesn’t
occur?98 Crucially, the monkey doesn’t press the lever. Similarly, if you
destroy its accumbens, a rat makes impulsive choices, instead of holding
out for a delayed larger reward. Conversely, back to the monkey—if
instead of flashing the light cue you electrically stimulate the tegmentum
to release dopamine, the monkey presses the lever. Dopamine is not just
about reward anticipation; it fuels the goal-directed behavior needed to
gain that reward; dopamine “binds” the value of a reward to the resulting
work. It’s about the motivation arising from those dopaminergic
projections to the PFC that is needed to do the harder thing (i.e., to
work).
In other words, dopamine is not about the happiness of reward. It’s
about the happiness of pursuit of reward that has a decent chance of
occurring.*99
This is central to understanding the nature of motivation, as well as
its failures (e.g., during depression, where there is inhibition of dopamine
signaling thanks to stress, or in anxiety, where such inhibition is caused
by projections from the amygdala).100 It also tells us about the source of
75