THE RESIDUES OF CULTURAL CRISES
I
n times of crisis—the London Blitz, New York after 9/11, San
Francisco after the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake—people pull
together.* That’s cool. But in contrast, chronic, pervasive, corrosive
menace doesn’t necessarily do the same to people or cultures.
The primal menace of hunger has left historical marks. Back to that
study of differences between countries’ tightness (where “tight”
countries were characterized by autocracy, suppression of dissent, and
omnipresence and enforcement of behavior norms).50 What sorts of
countries are tighter?* In addition to the high population-density
correlates mentioned earlier, there are also more historical food
shortages, lower food intake, and lower levels of protein and fat in the
diet. In other words, these are cultures chronically menaced by empty
stomachs.
Cultural tightness was also predicted by environmental degradation
—less available farmland or clean water, more pollution. Similarly,
habitat degradation and depletion of animal populations worsens conflict
in cultures dependent on bush meat. And a major theme of Jared
Diamond’s magisterial Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or
Succeed is how environmental degradation explains the violent collapse
of many civilizations.
Then there’s disease. In chapter 15 we’ll touch on “behavioral
immunity,” the ability of numerous species to detect cues of illness in
other individuals; as we’ll see, implicit cues about infectious disease
make people more xenophobic. Similarly, historical prevalence of
infectious disease predicts a culture’s openness to outsiders. Moreover,
other predictors of cultural tightness include having high historical
incidence of pandemics, of high infant and child mortality rates, and of
higher cumulative average number of years lost to communicable
disease.
Obviously, weather influences the incidence of organized violence—
consider the centuries of European wars taking a hiatus during the worst
of winter and the growing season.51 Even broader is the capacity of
weather and climate to shape culture. The Kenyan historian Ali Mazrui
301