genetic makeup will help by identifying their species. Alternatively,
you’re trying to guess whether a particular person is likely to have five
or four fingers on his hand. Knowing whether he uses buzz saws while
blindfolded is more useful than knowing the sequence of his genome.
Next consider the opposite—a trait that is not highly inherited but
which has high heritability. What do genes directly have to do with
humans being more likely than chimps to wear earrings? Not much. Now
consider individual differences among humans—how much do genes
help predict which individuals are wearing earrings at a high school
dance in 1958? Tons. Basically, if you had two X chromosomes, you
probably wore earrings, but if you had a Y chromosome, you wouldn’t
have been caught dead doing so. Thus, while genes had little to do with
the prevalence of earrings among Americans in 1958 being around 50
percent, they had lots to do with determining which Americans wore
them. Thus, in that time and place, wearing earrings, while not a strongly
inherited trait, had high heritability.
The Reliability of Heritability Measures
We’re now clear on the difference between inherited traits and their
degree of heritability and recognize that people are usually more
interested in the latter—you versus your neighbor—than the former—
you versus a wildebeest. As we saw, scads of behavioral and personality
traits have heritability scores of 40 to 60 percent, meaning that genetics
explains about half the variability in the trait. The point of this section is
that the nature of research typically inflates such scores.*30
Say a plant geneticist sits in the desert, studying a particular species
of plant. In this imaginary scenario a single gene, gene 3127, regulates
the plant’s growth. Gene 3127 comes in versions, A, B, and C. Plants
with version A always grow to be one inch tall; version B, two inches; C,
three inches.* What single fact gives you the most power in predicting a
plant’s height? Obviously, whether it has version A, B, or C—that
explains all the variation in height between plants, meaning 100 percent
heritability.
Meanwhile, twelve thousand miles away in a rain forest, a second
plant geneticist is studying a clone of that same plant. And in that
environment plants with version A, B, or C are 101, 102, or 103 inches
243