Other aspects of cognitive development are also conceptualized in
stages. An early stage occurs when toddlers form ego boundaries
—“There is a ‘me,’ separate from everyone else.” A lack of ego
boundaries is shown when a toddler isn’t all that solid on where he ends
and Mommy starts—she’s cut her finger, and he claims his finger hurts.5
Next comes the stage of realizing that other individuals have
different information than you do. Nine-month-olds look where someone
points (as can other apes and dogs), knowing the pointer has information
that they don’t. This is fueled by motivation: Where is that toy? Where’s
she looking? Older kids understand more broadly that other people have
different thoughts, beliefs, and knowledge than they, the landmark of
achieving Theory of Mind (ToM).6
Here’s what not having ToM looks like. A two-year-old and an adult
see a cookie placed in box A. The adult leaves, and the researcher
switches the cookie to box B. Ask the child, “When that person comes
back, where will he look for the cookie?” Box B—the child knows it’s
there and thus everyone knows. Around age three or four the child can
reason, “They’ll think it’s in A, even though I know it’s in B.” Shazam:
ToM.
Mastering such “false belief” tests is a major developmental
landmark. ToM then progresses to fancier insightfulness—e.g., grasping
irony, perspective taking, or secondary ToM (understanding person A’s
ToM about person B).7
Various cortical regions mediate ToM: parts of the medial PFC
(surprise!) and some new players, including the precuneus, the superior
temporal sulcus, and the temporoparietal junction (TPJ). This is shown
with neuroimaging; by ToM deficits if these regions are damaged
(autistic individuals, who have limited ToM, have decreased gray matter
and activity in the superior temporal sulcus); and by the fact that if you
temporarily inactivate the TPJ, people don’t consider someone’s
intentions when judging them morally.8
Thus there are stages of gaze following, followed by primary ToM,
then secondary ToM, then perspective taking, with the speed of
transitions influenced by experience (e.g., kids with older siblings
achieve ToM earlier than average).9
Naturally, there are criticisms of stage approaches to cognitive
development. One is at the heart of this book: a Piagetian framework sits
178