increased cognitive load. Likewise, people become more conservative
when tired, in pain or distracted with a cognitive task, or when blood
alcohol levels rise.
Recall from chapter 3 that willpower takes metabolic power, thanks
to the glucose demands of the frontal cortex. This was the finding that
when people are hungry, they become less generous in economic games.
A real-world example of this is startling (see graph on previous page)—
in a study of more than 1,100 judicial rulings, prisoners were granted
parole at about a 60 percent rate when judges had recently eaten, and at
essentially a 0 percent rate just before judges ate (note also the overall
decline over the course of a tiring day). Justice may be blind, but she’s
sure sensitive to her stomach gurgling.36
MORAL COGNITION
Another minefield. Surprise, people at both ends of the political
spectrum accuse the other side of impoverished moral thought.37 One
direction of this is seemingly bolstered by chapter 7’s Kohlberg stages of
moral development. Liberals, steeped in civil disobedience, tend to be at
a “higher” Kohlberg stage than are conservatives, with their fondness for
law and order. Are rightists less intellectually capable of reasoning at a
more advanced Kohlberg stage, or are they less motivated to do so?
Seemingly the latter—rightists and leftists are equally capable of
presenting the other’s perspective.
Jonathan Haidt of NYU provides a very different view.38 He
identifies six foundations of morality—care versus harm; fairness versus
cheating; liberty versus oppression; loyalty versus betrayal; authority
versus subversion; sanctity versus degradation. Both experimental and
real-world data show that liberals preferentially value the first three
goals, namely care, fairness, and liberty (and, showing an overlap with
Kohlbergian formulations, undervaluing loyalty, authority, and sanctity is
in many ways synonymous with postconventional thinking). In contrast,
conservatives heavily value loyalty, authority, and sanctity. Obviously,
this is a big difference. Is it okay to criticize your group to outsiders?
Rightists: no, that’s disloyal. Leftists: yes, if justified. Should you ever
disobey a law? Rightists: no, that undermines authority. Leftists: of
course, if it’s a bad law. Is it okay to burn the flag? Rightists: never, it’s
sacred. Leftists: come on, it’s a piece of cloth.
450