autonomy), in-group loyalty and respect for authority (both of which
Shweder would call community), and issues of purity and sanctity (i.e.,
Shweder’s realm of divinity).*27
The existence of universals of morality raises the issue of whether
that means that they should trump more local, provincial moral rules.
Between the moral absolutists on one side and the relativists on the other,
people like the historian of science Michael Shermer argue reasonably
for provisional morality—if a moral stance is widespread across cultures,
start off by giving the benefit of the doubt to its importance, but watch
your wallet.28
It’s certainly interesting that, for example, all cultures designate
certain things as sacred; but it is far more so to look at the variability in
what is considered sacred, how worked up people get when such sanctity
is violated,* and what is done to keep such violations from reoccurring.
I’ll touch on this huge topic with three subjects—cross-cultural
differences concerning the morality of cooperation and competition,
affronts to honor, and the reliance on shame versus guilt.
COOPERATION AND COMPETITION
Some of the most dramatic cross-cultural variability in moral
judgment concerns cooperation and competition. This was shown to an
extraordinary extent in a 2008 Science paper by a team of British and
Swiss economists.
Subjects played a “public good” economic game where players begin
with a certain number of tokens and then decide, in each of a series of
rounds, how many to contribute to a shared pool; the pool is then
multiplied and shared evenly among all the players. The alternative to
contributing is for subjects to keep the tokens for themselves. Thus, the
worst payoff for an individual player would be if they contributed all
their tokens to the pool, while no other player contributed any; the best
would be if the individual contributed no tokens and everyone else
contributed everything. As a feature of the design, subjects could “pay”
to punish other players for the size of their contribution. Subjects were
from around the world.
First finding: Across all cultures, people were more prosocial than
sheer economic rationality would predict. If everyone played in the most
brutally asocial, realpolitik manner, no one would contribute to the pool.
Instead subjects from all cultures consistently contributed. Perhaps as an
495