This is the Tit for Tat strategy. Note that it can never win. Best case is
a draw, if playing against another person using Tit for Tat or someone
using an “always cooperate” strategy. Otherwise it loses by a small
margin. Every other strategy would always beat Tit for Tat by a small
margin. However, other strategies playing against each other can produce
catastrophic losses. And when everything is summed, Tit for Tat wins. It
lost nearly every battle but won the war. Or rather, the peace. In other
words, Tit for Tat drives other strategies to extinction.
Tit for Tat has four things going for it: Its proclivity is to cooperate
(i.e., that’s its starting state). But it isn’t a sucker and punishes defectors.
It’s forgiving—if the defector resumes cooperating, so will Tit for Tat.
And the strategy is simple.
Axelrod’s tournament launched a zillion papers about Tit for Tat in
PD and related games (more later). Then something crucial occurred—
Axelrod and Hamilton hooked up. Biologists studying the evolution of
behavior longed to be as quantitative as those studying the evolution of
kidneys in desert rats. And here was this world of social scientists
studying this very topic, even if they didn’t know it. PD provided a
framework for thinking about the strategic evolution of cooperation and
competition, as Axelrod and Hamilton explored in a 1981 paper (famous
enough that it’s a buzz phrase—e.g., “How’d your lecture go today?”
“Terrible, way behind schedule; I didn’t even get to Axelrod and
Hamilton”).34
As the evolutionary biologists started hanging with the political
scientists, they inserted real-world possibilities into game scenarios. One
addressed a flaw in Tit for Tat.
Let’s introduce signal errors—a message is misunderstood, someone
forgets to tell someone something, or there’s a hiccup of noise in the
system. Like in the real world.
There has been a signal error in round 5, with two individuals using a
Tit for Tat strategy. This is what everyone means:
Example 7:
You: C C C C C
Her: C C C C C
But thanks to a signal error, this is what you think happened:
351