NINE LONG MONTHS
The Cat in the Hat in the Womb
The existence of prenatal environmental influences caught the
public’s imagination with some charming studies demonstrating that
near-term fetuses hear (what’s going on outside the womb), taste
(amniotic fluid), and remember and prefer those stimuli after birth.
This was shown experimentally—inject lemon-flavored saline into a
pregnant rat’s amniotic fluid, and her pups are born preferring that flavor.
Moreover, some spices consumed by pregnant women get into amniotic
fluid. Thus we may be born preferring foods our mothers ate during
pregnancy—pretty unorthodox cultural transmission.59
Prenatal effects can also be auditory, as shown by inspired research
by Anthony DeCasper of the University of North Carolina.60 A pregnant
woman’s voice is audible in the womb, and newborns recognize and
prefer the sound of their mother’s voice.* DeCasper used ethology’s
playbook to show this: A newborn can learn to suck a pacifier in two
different patterns of long and short sucks. Generate one pattern, and you
hear Mom’s voice; the other, another woman’s voice. Newborns want
Mom’s voice. Elements of language are also learned in utero—the
contours of a newborn’s cry are similar to the contours of speech in the
mother’s language.
The cognitive capacities of near-term fetuses are even more
remarkable. For example, fetuses can distinguish between two pairs of
nonsense syllables (“biba” versus “babi”). How do you know? Get this—
Mom says “Biba, biba, biba” repeatedly while fetal heart rate is
monitored. “Boring (or perhaps lulling),” thinks the fetus, and heart rate
slows. Then Mom switches to “babi.” If the fetus doesn’t distinguish
between the two, heart rate deceleration continues. But if the difference
is noted—“Whoa, what happened?”—heart rate increases. Which is what
DeCasper reported.61
DeCasper and colleague Melanie Spence then showed (using the
pacifier-sucking-pattern detection system) that newborns typically don’t
distinguish between the sounds of their mother reading a passage from
211