Contingent Testosterone Effects
This context dependency means that rather than causing X,
testosterone amplifies the power of something else to cause X.
A classic example comes from a 1977 study of groups of male
talapoin monkeys.11 Testosterone was administered to the middle-
ranking male in each group (say, rank number 3 out of five), increasing
their levels of aggression. Does this mean that these guys, stoked on
’roids, started challenging numbers 1 and 2 in the hierarchy? No. They
became aggressive jerks to poor numbers 4 and 5. Testosterone did not
create new social patterns of aggression; it exaggerated preexisting ones.
In human studies testosterone didn’t raise baseline activity in the
amygdala; it boosted the amygdala’s response and heart-rate reactivity to
angry faces (but not to happy or neutral ones). Similarly, testosterone did
not make subjects more selfish and uncooperative in an economic game;
it made them more punitive when provoked by being treated poorly,
enhancing “vengeful reactive aggression.”12
The context dependency also occurs on the neurobiological level, in
that the hormone shortens the refractory period of neurons in the
amygdala and amygdaloid targets in the hypothalamus.13 Recall that the
refractory period comes in neurons after action potentials. This is when
the neuron’s resting potential is hyperpolarized (i.e., when it is more
negatively charged than usual), making the neuron less excitable,
producing a period of silence after the action potential. Thus, shorter
refractory periods mean a higher rate of action potentials. So is
testosterone causing action potentials in these neurons? No. It’s causing
them to fire at a faster rate if they are stimulated by something else.
Similarly, testosterone increases amygdala response to angry faces, but
not to other sorts. Thus, if the amygdala is already responding to some
realm of social learning, testosterone ups the volume.
A Key Synthesis: The Challenge Hypothesis
Thus, testosterone’s actions are contingent and amplifying,
exacerbating preexisting tendencies toward aggression rather than
creating aggression out of thin air. This picture inspired the “challenge
hypothesis,” a wonderfully unifying conceptualization of testosterone’s
actions.14 As proposed in 1990 by the superb behavioral endocrinologist
103