the group would occasionally stumble onto the alternative method—and
would then abandon it, going back to doing it the “normal” way. Just
because everyone else was doing so.* The same phenomenon was
subsequently shown in capuchin monkeys and wild birds.
Thus animals will perform one version of a behavior not because it is
better but simply because everyone else does. Even more striking, animal
conformity can be detrimental. In a 2013 study Andrew Whiten of the
University of St Andrews presented wild vervet monkeys with two bins
of maize, dyed either pink or blue.55 One color tasted fine; the other had
a bitter additive. The monkeys learned to avoid the latter and months
later still ate only the “safe”-colored maize—even after the additive was
omitted.
As infants were born or adults who had grown up elsewhere migrated
into the group, they conformed to this food choice, learning to eat only
the same color food as everyone else. In other words, forgoing half the
potential food just because of the need to fit in—monkeys joining the
herd, acting like sheep, going over the cliff like lemmings. One example
starkly displays the same in humans: in life-threatening emergencies
(e.g., a restaurant fire), people frequently attempt to escape by following
the crowd in what they know to be the wrong direction.
The deeply ingrained nature of human conformity and obedience in
humans is shown by the ages when they are apparent. As detailed in
chapter 7, zillions of pages have been written about conformity and peer
pressure in kids. One study nicely demonstrates the continuity of
conformity between us and other species. This was the report that a
chimp was more likely to conform to the behaviors of three individuals
doing a behavior once each than to one individual doing the behavior
three times. The study showed the same in two-year-old humans.
The depths of human conformity and obedience are shown by the
speed with which they occur—it takes less than 200 milliseconds for
your brain to register that the group has picked a different answer from
yours, and less than 380 milliseconds for a profile of activation that
predicts changing your opinion. Our brains are biased to get along by
going along in less than a second.56
Neural Bases
458