BUT DOES ANYTHING USEFUL
ACTUALLY COME OF THIS?
A
s I noted, the most formidable skeptic of the relevance of
neuroscience to the legal system is Stephen Morse, who has
written extensively and effectively about the subject.22 He is the
definitive advocate of free will being compatible with a deterministic
world. He’s fine with M’Naghten and recognizes that there can be
sufficient brain damage to compromise the notion of responsibility
—“Various causes can produce genuine excusing conditions, such as
lack of rational or control capacity.” But beyond those rare instances, he
believes, neuroscience offers little that should challenge the notion of
responsibility. As he has quipped, “Brains don’t kill people. People kill
people.”
Morse epitomizes the skepticism about bringing neuroscience into
the courtroom. For one thing, he viscerally cringes at how much of a fad
“neurolaw” and “neurocriminology” have become. A wonderfully
sardonic writer,* he has announced the discovery of the disorder “brain
overclaim syndrome,” whose sufferers have gotten carried away with the
importance of neuroscience because they’ve been “infected and inflamed
by stunning advances in our understanding of the brain,” causing them to
“make moral and legal claims that the new neuroscience does not entail
and cannot sustain.”
One absolutely valid criticism of his is a narrow, practical one. This
is the worry, aired earlier, that juries will give undue weight to
neuroimaging data just because of how impressive the images are.
Apropos of that, Morse has called neuroscience “determinism du jour,
grabbing the attention previously given to psychological or genetic
determinism. . . . The only thing different about neuroscience is that we
have prettier pictures and it appears more scientific.”
Another valid criticism concerns findings in neuroscience usually
merely being descriptive (e.g., “Brain region A projects to brain region
Q”) or correlative (e.g., “Elevated levels of neurotransmitter X and of
behavior Z tend to go together”). Data such as those don’t disprove free
600