aspects of such understanding. As for mirror neurons being the portal for
peering into someone’s soul and attaining super-duper understanding
from within, I think things are best summarized by the title of Hickok’s
well-received 2014 book The Myth of Mirror Neurons.39
Which leads to the Wild West of mirror neuron–ology, with
speculations that mirror neurons are essential to language, aesthetics,
consciousness.40 Most of all, within two seconds of people first hearing
about mirror neurons, they started writing reviews where the last
paragraph would say something like “Wow, mirror neurons! How cool is
that? This opens up all sorts of interesting avenues. Maybe they even
explain . . . EMPATHY!”
Sure, why not? Feeling someone’s pain is like mirroring their
experience, feeling as if you are them. Tailor made, an irresistible idea.
And in the decades since mirror neurons’ discovery, the “maybe they
even explain empathy” reviews have continued. Gallese, for example,
nearly twenty years into the mirror neuron era, speculates: “I proposed
the mirroring could be a basic functional principle of our brain and that
our capacity to empathize with others might be mediated by embodied
stimulation mechanisms [i.e., mirroring].” Iacoboni, at the same time,
writes, “Mirror neurons are likely cellular candidates for the core layer of
empathy.” There have been some supportive hints—for example, people
who self-report being particularly empathic show stronger mirror
neuron–esque responses to matching movements. But for skeptics
everything else is mere speculation.41
That’s disappointing. But worse is people skipping over the “maybe”
and concluding that mirror neurons have been proven to mediate
empathy. Iacoboni, for example, mistakes correlation for causality:
“Other studies, however, show that [PMC] activity correlates with
empathy even when subjects watch grasping actions without overt
emotional content. Thus, the mirror neuron activity is a prerequisite for
experiencing empathy (my emphasis).”42
A flagrant example of this is the neuroscientist Vilayanur
Ramachandran of UC San Diego, one of the most flamboyantly creative
people in the business, doing fascinating research on phantom limbs,
synesthesia, and out-of-body experiences. He’s brilliant but has gotten a
bit giddy with mirror neurons. A sampling: “We know that my mirror
neurons can literally feel your pain.” He’s called them “the driving force
behind the great leap forward” into human behavioral modernity sixty
539