tall, respectively. This geneticist also concludes that plant height in this
case shows 100 percent heritability.
Then, as required by the plot line, the two stand side by side at a
conference, one brandishing 1/2/3 inch data, the other 101/102/103. They
combine data sets. Now you want to predict the height of one example of
that plant, taken from anywhere on the planet. You can either know
which version of gene 3127 it possesses or what environment it is
growing in. Which is more useful? Knowing which environment. When
you study this plant species in two environments, you discover that
heritability of height is miniscule.
Neon lights! This is crucial: Study a gene in only one environment
and, by definition, you’ve eliminated the ability to see if it works
differently in other environments (in other words, if other environments
regulate the gene differently). And thus you’ve artificially inflated the
importance of the genetic contribution. The more environments in which
you study a genetic trait, the more novel environmental effects will be
revealed, decreasing the heritability score.
Scientists study things in controlled settings to minimize variation in
extraneous factors and thus get cleaner, more interpretable results—for
example, making sure that the plants all have their height measured
around the same time of year. This inflates heritability scores, because
you’ve prevented yourself from ever discovering that some extraneous
environmental factor isn’t actually extraneous.* Thus a heritability score
tells how much variation in a trait is explained by genes in the
environment(s) in which it’s been studied. As you study the trait in more
environments, the heritability score will decrease. This is recognized by
Bouchard: “These conclusions [derived from a behavior genetics study]
can be generalized, of course only to new populations exposed to a range
of environments similar to those studied.”31
Okay, that was slick on my part, inventing a plant that grows in both
desert and rain forest, just to trash heritability scores. Real plants rarely
occur in both of those environments. Instead, in one rain forest the three
gene versions might produce plants of heights 1, 2, and 3 inches, while in
another they are 1.1, 2.1, and 3.1, producing a heritability score that,
while less than 100 percent, is still extremely high.
Genes typically still play hefty roles in explaining individual
variability, given that any given species lives in a limited range of
environments—capybaras stick to the tropics, polar bears to the Arctic.
244