study suggests that the washing decreases emotional arousal, as it
decreased the diameter of subjects’ pupils.19
We intertwine physical and moral purity when it comes to our own
actions. In one of my all-time favorite psychology studies, Chen-Bo
Zhong of the University of Toronto and Katie Liljenquist of
Northwestern University demonstrated that the brain has trouble
distinguishing between being a dirty scoundrel and being in need of a
bath. Subjects were asked to recount either a moral or an immoral act in
their past. Afterward, as a token of appreciation, the researchers offered
the volunteers a choice between the gift of a pencil and a package of
antiseptic wipes. And the folks who had just wallowed in their ethical
failures were more likely to go for the wipes. Another study, showing the
same effect when people were instructed to lie, demonstrated that the
more adversely consequential the lie was presented as being, the more
washing subjects did. Lady Macbeth and Pontius Pilate weren’t the only
ones to at least try to absolve their sins by washing their hands, and this
phenomenon of embodied cognition is referred to as the “Macbeth
effect.”20
This effect is remarkably concrete. In another study subjects were
instructed to lie about something—with either their mouths (i.e., to tell a
lie) or their hands (i.e., to write down a lie).21 Afterward, remarkably,
liars were more likely to pick complementary cleansing products than
control subjects who communicated something truthful: the immoral
mouth-ers were more likely to pick a mouthwash sample; the immoral
scribes, hand soap. Furthermore, as shown with neuroimaging, when
contemplating mouthwash versus soap, those who had just spoken a lie
activated parts of the sensorimotor cortex related to the mouth (i.e., the
subjects were more aware of their mouths at the time); those who had
written the lie activated the cortical regions mapping onto their hand.
Embodied cognition can be specific to parts of the body.
Another fascinating study showed the influence of culture in the
Macbeth effect. The studies just cited were carried out with European or
American subjects. When the same is done with East Asian subjects, the
urge afterward is to wash the face, rather than the hands. If you are going
to save face, it should be a clean one.22
Finally, most important, this intermixing of moral and physical
hygiene affects the way we actually behave. That original study on
contemplating one’s moral failings and the subsequent desire to wash
564