“So I take the monkey, sit near him. We’re all awkward—he’s not
looking at me, I pretend there’s a nettle between my toes. But eventually
I give him some of the meat, he grooms me a bit. The whole thing was
stupid, we should have done that in the first place.”
If you’re a chimp, reconciliation is easy once your heart rate returns
to normal. Sometimes for us too—touch a friend’s shoulder, give a self-
effacing grimace, say, “Hey, look, just now I was being a—” and they cut
you off, saying, “No, no, it was me. I shouldn’t . . .” and things are okay.
Easy. How about when everyone’s trying to patch things up after
your people have slaughtered three quarters of theirs, or after they came
as colonials, stole your land, and forced you to live in slum “homelands”
for decades? Trickier.
We’re the only species that institutionalizes reconciliation and that
grapples with “truth,” “apology,” “forgiveness,” “reparations,”
“amnesty,” and “forgetting.”
The apogee of institutionalized complexity is the truth and
reconciliation commission (TRC). The first came in the 1980s, and
they’ve been depressingly useful ever since, occurring, for example, in
Bolivia, Canada, Australia, Nepal, Rwanda, and Poland. Some TRCs
have been in stable countries (Canada and Australia) facing up to their
long history of abuse of indigenous peoples. Most, however, have come
after a nation emerged from a bloody, divisive transition—a dictator
overthrown, a civil war settled, a genocide halted. The popular
perception is that their purpose is for perpetrators of abuse to confess,
express remorse, and beg for forgiveness from victims, who then grant it,
resulting in tearful embraces between the two.
But instead TRCs are typically exercises in pragmatism, where
perpetrators basically say, “This is what I did, and I vow to never harm
your people again,” and the victims basically say, “Okay, we vow to not
seek extrajudicial retribution.” An often towering achievement, if less
heartwarming.
Probably the best-studied TRC was South Africa’s after the defeat of
apartheid. It came with enormous moral legitimacy, being overseen by
Desmond Tutu, and gained further legitimacy by, though
overwhelmingly focusing on the acts of whites, also examining atrocities
by African liberation fighters. Hearings were public and included victims
getting to tell their stories. More than six thousand of the perpetrators
testified and applied for amnesty; this was granted to 13 percent.
638