FEELING SOMEONE ELSE’S PAIN
C
onsider the following: You stub your toe. Pain receptors there send
messages to the spine and on up to the brain, where various regions
kick into action. Some of these areas tell you about the location,
intensity, and quality of the pain. Is it your left toe or right ear that hurts?
Was your toe stubbed or crushed by a tractor-trailer? These various pain-
ometers, the meat and potatoes of pain processing, are found in every
mammal.
As we first learned in chapter 2, the frontal cortical anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC) also plays a role, assessing the meaning of the pain.8
Maybe it’s bad news: your painful toe signals the start of some unlikely
disease. Or maybe it’s good news: you’re going to get your fire-walker
diploma because the hot coals only made your toes throb. As we saw in
the last chapter, the ACC is heavily involved in “error detection,” noting
discrepancies between what is anticipated and what occurs. And pain
from out of nowhere surely represents a discrepancy between the pain-
free setting that you anticipate versus a painful reality.
But the ACC does more than just tell you the meaning of a painful
toe. As we saw in chapter 6, put a subject in a brain scanner, make them
think they’re tossing a Cyberball back and forth with two other players,
and then make them feel excluded—the other two stop throwing the ball
to them. “Hey, how come they don’t want to play with me?” And the
ACC activates.
In other words, rejection hurts. “Well, yeah,” you might say. “But
that’s not like stubbing your toe.” But as far as those neurons in the ACC
are concerned, social and literal pain are the same. And as proof of the
rooting of the former in sociality, there isn’t ACC activation if the
subject believes the ball isn’t being thrown to them because of a glitch
connecting them to the other two subjects’ computers.
And the ACC can take things a step further, as we saw in chapter 14.
Receive a mild shock, and there’s activation of your ACC (along with
activation of the more mundane pain-ometer regions). Now instead
watch your beloved get shocked in the same way. Pain-ometer brain
559