features—for example, yes, the end justifies the means if the end is to
maximize my pleasure (hedonism), to maximize overall levels of
wealth,* to strengthen the powers that be (state consequentialism). For
most, though, consequentialism is about classical utilitarianism—it is
okay to use people as a means to the end of maximizing overall levels of
happiness.
When deontologism and consequentialism contemplate trolleys, the
former is about moral intuitions rooted in the vmPFC, amygdala, and
insula, while the latter is the domain of the dlPFC and moral reasoning.
Why is it that our automatic, intuitive moral judgments tend to be
nonutilitarian? Because, as Greene states in his book, “Our moral brains
evolved to help us spread our genes, not to maximize our collective
happiness.”
The trolley studies show people’s moral heterogeneity. In them
approximately 30 percent of subjects were consistently deontologists,
unwilling to either pull a lever or push a person, even at the cost of those
five lives. Another 30 percent were always utilitarian, willing to pull or
push. And for everyone else, moral philosophies were context dependent.
The fact that a plurality of people fall into this category prompts
Greene’s “dual process” model, stating that we are usually a mixture of
valuing means and ends. What’s your moral philosophy? If harm to the
person who is the means is unintentional or if the intentionality is really
convoluted and indirect, I’m a utilitarian consequentialist, and if the
intentionality is right in front of my nose, I’m a deontologist.
The different trolley scenarios reveal what circumstances push us
toward intuitive deontology, which toward utilitarian reasoning. Which
outcome is better?
For the sort of person reading this book (i.e., who reads and thinks,
things to be justifiably self-congratulatory about), when considering this
issue at a calm distance, utilitarianism seems like the place to start—
maximizing collective happiness. There is the emphasis on equity—not
equal treatment but taking everyone’s well-being into equal
consideration. And there is the paramount emphasis on impartiality: if
someone thinks the situation being proposed is morally equitable, they
should be willing to flip a coin to determine which role they play.
Utilitarianism can be critiqued on practical grounds—it’s hard to find
a common currency of people’s differing versions of happiness, the
emphasis on ends over means requires that you be good at predicting
505