STRATIFIED VERSUS EGALITARIAN
CULTURES
A
nother meaningful way to think about cross-cultural variation
concerns how unequally resources (e.g., land, food, material
goods, power, or prestige) are distributed.33 Hunter-gatherer societies
have typically been egalitarian, as we’ll soon see, throughout hominin
history. Inequality emerged when “stuff”—things to possess and
accumulate—was invented following animal domestication and the
development of agriculture. The more stuff, reflecting surplus, job
specialization, and technological sophistication, the greater the potential
inequality. Moreover, inequality expands enormously when cultures
invent inheritance within families. Once invented, inequality became
pervasive. Among traditional pastoralist or small-scale agricultural
societies, levels of wealth inequality match or exceed those in the most
unequal industrialized societies.
Why have stratified cultures dominated the planet, generally
replacing more egalitarian ones? For population biologist Peter Turchin,
the answer is that stratified cultures are ideally suited to being
conquerors—they come with chains of command.34 Both empirical and
theoretical work suggests that in addition, in unstable environments
stratified societies are “better able to survive resource shortages [than
egalitarian cultures] by sequestering mortality in the lower classes.” In
other words, when times are tough, the unequal access to wealth
becomes the unequal distribution of misery and death. Notably, though,
stratification is not the only solution to such instability—this is where
hunter-gatherers benefit from being able to pick up and move.
A score of millennia after the invention of inequality, Westernized
societies at the extremes of the inequality continuum differ strikingly.
One difference concerns “social capital.” Economic capital is the
collective quantity of goods, services, and financial resources. Social
capital is the collective quantity of resources such as trust, reciprocity,
and cooperation. You learn a ton about a community’s social capital with
two simple questions. First: “Can people usually be trusted?” A
291