US
U
s/Them-ing typically involves inflating the merits of Us
concerning core values—we are more correct, wise, moral, and
worthy when it comes to knowing what the gods want/running the
economy/raising kids/fighting this war. Us-ness also involves inflating
the merits of our arbitrary markers, and that can take some work—
rationalizing why our food is tastier, our music more moving, our
language more logical or poetic.
Perhaps even more than superiority, feelings about Us center on
shared obligations, on willingness and expectation of mutuality.12 The
essence of an Us mind-set is nonrandom clustering producing higher-
than-expected frequencies of positive interactions. As we saw in chapter
10, the logical strategy in one-round Prisoner’s Dilemma is to defect.
Cooperation flourishes when games have an uncertain number of rounds,
and with the capacity for our reputations to precede us. Groups, by
definition, have multiple-round games and the means to spread news of
someone being a jerk.
This sense of obligation and reciprocity among Us is shown in
economic games, where players are more trusting, generous, and
cooperative with in-group than with out-group members (even with
minimal group paradigms, where players know that groupings are
arbitrary).13 Chimps even show this trust element where they have to
choose between (a) being guaranteed to receive some unexciting food
and (b) getting some fabulous food if another chimp will share it with
them. Chimps opt for the second scenario, requiring trust, when the other
chimp is a grooming partner.
Moreover, priming people to think of a victim of violence as an Us,
rather than a Them, increases the odds of their intervening. And recall
from chapter 3 how fans at a soccer match are more likely to aid an
injured spectator if he’s wearing home-team insignias.14
Enhanced prosociality for in-group members does not even require
face-to-face interactions. In one study subjects from an ethnically
polarized neighborhood encountered an open, stamped questionnaire on
the sidewalk near a mailbox. Subjects were more likely to mail it if the
396