Muslims, British Protestants, and Mexican Catholics as to whether
they’d die for their religion and whether people of other religions caused
the world’s troubles. In all cases frequent attendance of religious
services, but not frequent prayer, predicted those views. It’s not
religiosity that stokes intergroup hostility; it’s being surrounded by
coreligionists who affirm parochial identity, commitment, and shared
loves and hatreds. This is hugely important.
—
What should one make of these various findings? Religiosity isn’t going
anywhere.* Given that, it seems that boosting in-group sociality is best
done with a moralizing, punitive god. The standard, wearisome critique
of atheism is that lack of a god(s) produces nihilistic amorality; the
standard response is that it’s pretty unimpressive if you are kind only
because you fear damnation. Unimpressive or not, it appears to be useful.
The big challenge is when communal aspects of religiosity fuel out-
group hostility. It’s useless to call for religions to broaden the extent of
their Us-ness. Religions are quirky as to who is an Us, ranging from
“only those who look, act, talk, and pray like people in our sect” to “all
of life.” It will be discouragingly tough to shift religions from the former
to the latter.
Contact
As introduced in chapter 11, many have speculated that inter-group
tensions are reduced by contact—when people get to know one another,
everyone gets along. But despite that salutary possibility, intergroup
contact readily elevates hostilities.18
As seen in chapter 9, intergroup contact worsens things when the two
groups are treated unequally or are unequal in number; where the smaller
group is surrounded; where intergroup boundaries are ambiguous; when
the groups vie to display symbols of their sacred values (e.g., Northern
Irish Protestants marching with Orangemen flags through Catholic
neighborhoods). Elbows rubbed raw.
Obviously, the opposite is needed to minimize threat and anxiety—
groups encountering each other in equal numbers and treatment, in a
neutral setting free of agitprop and where there is institutional oversight
of the venture. Most important, interactions work best when there is a
627