but at the cost of nutrition for her other children (either current or future).
This is weaning conflict.40
This causes endless primate tantrums.41 Some female baboon looks
frazzled and cranky. Three steps behind is her toddler, making the most
pitiful whimpering and whining sounds imaginable. Every few minutes
the kid tries to nurse; Mom irritably pushes him away, even slaps him.
More wailing. It’s parent-offspring weaning conflict; as long as Mom
nurses, she’s unlikely to ovulate, curtailing her future reproductive
potential. Baboon moms evolved to wean their kids at the age where they
can feed themselves, and baboon kids evolved to try to delay that day.
Interestingly, as females age, with decreasing likelihood of a future child,
they become less forceful in weaning.*
There’s also mother-fetus conflict. You’re a fetus with an
evolutionary agenda. What do you want? Maximal nutrition from Mom,
and who cares if that impacts her future reproductive potential?
Meanwhile, Mom wants to balance current and future reproductive
prospects. Remarkably, fetus and Mom have a metabolic struggle
involving insulin, the pancreatic hormone secreted when blood glucose
levels rise, which triggers glucose entry into target cells. The fetus
releases a hormone that makes Mom’s cells unresponsive to insulin (i.e.,
“insulin resistant”), as well as an enzyme that degrades Mom’s insulin.
Thus Mom absorbs less glucose from her bloodstream, leaving more for
the fetus.*
Intersexual Genetic Conflict
In some species the fetus has an ally during maternal/fetal conflict—
the father. Consider a species where males are migratory, mating with
females and then moving on, never to be seen again. What’s a male’s
opinion about maternal/fetal conflict? Make sure the fetus, i.e., his child,
grabs as much nutrition as possible, even if that lessens Mom’s future
reproductive potential—who cares, that won’t be his kid down the line.
He’s more than just rooting for his fetus.
This helps explain a mysterious, quirky feature of genetics. Normally
a gene works the same way, regardless of which parent it comes from.
But certain rare genes are “imprinted,” working differently, or only being
activated, depending on the parent of origin. Their purpose was
361