Neuroscientist: No.
Prosecutor: Can brain science explain why the same amount
of damage produced murderous behavior in the defendant?
Neuroscientist: No.
The problem is that, even amid all these biological insights that allow
us to be snitty about those silly homunculi, we still can’t predict much
about behavior. Perhaps at the statistical level of groups, but not when it
comes to individuals.
Explaining Lots and Predicting Little
If a person’s leg is fractured, how predictable is it that they will have
trouble walking? I think it would be safe to predict something close to
100 percent. If they have serious inflammatory lung disease, how
predictable is it that their breathing will be labored at times and that they
will tire easily? Again, around 100 percent. Same for the effects of
significant blockage of blood flow to the legs or extensive cirrhosis of
the liver.
Let’s switch to the brain and neurological dysfunction. What if
someone has had a brain injury, and the neurons around the resulting scar
tissue rewire so that they stimulate both themselves and one another—
how predictable is it that the person will have a seizure? How about if
they have congenital weaknesses in the walls of the blood vessels
throughout the brain—how likely is a cerebral aneurysm at some point?
How about if they have a mutation in the gene that causes Huntington’s
disease—how likely are they to have a neuromuscular disorder by age
sixty? Really high in all cases; probably approaching 100 percent.
Let’s incorporate behavior. If someone has extensive frontocortical
damage, how predictable is it that you’d note something odd about them,
behaviorally, after a five-minute conversation? Something like 75
percent.
Now let’s consider a broader range of behaviors. How predictable is
it that this person with the frontal damage will do something horrifically
violent at some point? Or that someone who was abused repeatedly as a
child will become an abusive adult? That a soldier who went through a
battle that killed his buddies will develop PTSD? That a person with the
602