incandescent presence. There’s that strange version of reputation that
comes in the rare cultures that have invented a moralizing god, one who
monitors human behavior and rewards or punishes accordingly; as we
saw in chapter 9, it is only when cultures get large enough that there are
anonymous interactions among strangers that they tend to invent
moralizing gods. A recent study shows that across a worldwide range of
religions, the more people perceive their god(s) to monitor and punish,
the more prosocial they are in an anonymous interaction. Thus there is
the self-interested benefit of tipping the cosmic scale in your favor. And
probably most inaccessibly, there is the purely internal reward of
altruism—the warm glow of having done good, the lessened sting of
guilt, the increased sense of connection to others, the solidifying sense of
being able to include goodness in your self-definition.
Science has been able to catch the self-interest component of
empathy in the act.55 As noted, some of the self-interest reflects concerns
about self-definition—personality profiles show that the more charitable
people are, the more they tend to define themselves by their charitability.
Which comes first? It’s impossible to tell, but highly charitable people
tend to have been brought up by parents who were charitable and who
emphasized charitable acts as a moral imperative (particularly in a
religious context).
—
How about the self-interested reputational rewards of being altruistic, the
cachet of conspicuous largesse rather than conspicuous consumption? As
emphasized in chapter 10, people become more prosocial when
reputation rides on it, and personality profiles also show that highly
charitable people tend to be particularly dependent on external approval.
Two of the studies just cited that showed dopaminergic activation when
people were being charitable came with a catch. Subjects were given
money and, while in a brain scanner, decided whether to keep the money
or donate. Being charitable activated dopamine “reward” systems—when
there was an observer present. When no one was present, dopamine
tended to flow most when subjects kept the money for themselves.
As emphasized by the twelfth-century philosopher Moses
Maimonides, the purest form of charity, the most stripped of self-interest,
is when both the giver and the recipient are anonymous.* And, as shown
in those brain scanners, this is perhaps the rarest form as well.
546