activate more frontal cortex than do higher-SES kids. In addition,
childhood poverty impairs maturation of the corpus callosum, a bundle
of axonal fibers connecting the two hemispheres and integrating their
function. This is so wrong—foolishly pick a poor family to be born into,
and by kindergarten, the odds of your succeeding at life’s marshmallow
tests are already stacked against you.34
Considerable research focuses on how poverty “gets under the skin.”
Some mechanisms are human specific—if you’re poor, you’re more
likely to grow up near environmental toxins,*35 in a dangerous
neighborhood with more liquor stores than markets selling produce;
you’re less likely to attend a good school or have parents with time to
read to you. Your community is likely to have poor social capital, and
you, poor self-esteem. But part of the link reflects the corrosive effects of
subordination in all hierarchical species. For example, having a low-
ranking mother predicts elevated glucocorticoids in adulthood in
baboons.36
Thus, childhood adversity can atrophy and blunt the functioning of
the hippocampus and frontal cortex. But it’s the opposite in the amygdala
—lots of adversity and the amygdala becomes larger and hyperreactive.
One consequence is increased risk of anxiety disorders; when coupled
with the poor frontocortical development, it explains problems with
emotion and behavior regulation, especially impulse control.37
Childhood adversity accelerates amygdaloid maturation in a
particular way. Normally, around adolescence the frontal cortex gains the
ability to inhibit the amygdala, saying, “I wouldn’t do this if I were you.”
But after childhood adversity, the amygdala develops the ability to
inhibit the frontal cortex, saying, “I’m doing this and just try to stop me.”
Childhood adversity also damages the dopamine system (with its role
in reward, anticipation, and goal-directed behavior) in two ways.
First, early adversity produces an adult organism more vulnerable to
drug and alcohol addiction. The pathway to this vulnerability is probably
threefold: (a) effects on the developing dopamine system; (b) the
excessive adult exposure to glucocorticoids, which increases drug
craving; (c) that poorly developed frontal cortex.38
Childhood adversity also substantially increases the risk of adult
depression. Depression’s defining symptom is anhedonia, the inability to
feel, anticipate, or pursue pleasure. Chronic stress depletes the
mesolimbic system of dopamine, generating anhedonia.* The link
196