composite of standard psychological assessments and convictions for
violent crimes)? No. But MAO-A status coupled with something else
powerfully did. Having the low-activity version of MAO-A tripled the
likelihood . . . but only in people with a history of severe childhood
abuse. And if there was no such history, the variant was not predictive of
anything. This is the essence of gene/environment interaction. What does
having a particular variant of the MAO-A gene have to do with antisocial
behavior? It depends on the environment. “Warrior gene” my ass.
This study is important not just for its demonstration of a powerful
gene/environment interaction but for what the interaction is, namely the
ability of an abusive childhood environment to collaborate with a
particular genetic constitution. To quote a major review on the subject,
“In a healthy environment, increased threat sensitivity, poor emotion
control and enhanced fear memory in MAOA-L [i.e., the “warrior”
variant] men might only manifest as variation in temperament within a
‘normal’ or subclinical range. However, these same characteristics in an
abusive childhood environment—one typified by persistent uncertainty,
unpredictable threat, poor behavioral modeling and social referencing,
and inconsistent reinforcement for prosocial decision making—might
predispose toward frank aggression and impulsive violence in the adult.”
In a similar vein, the low-activity variant of the serotonin transporter
gene was reported to be associated with adult aggressiveness . . . but only
when coupled with childhood adversity.45 This is straight out of the
lessons of the previous chapter.
Since then, this MAO-A variant/childhood abuse interaction has been
frequently replicated, and even demonstrated with respect to aggressive
behavior in rhesus monkeys.46 There have also been hints as to how this
interaction works—the MAO-A gene promoter is regulated by stress and
glucocorticoids.
MAO-A variants show other important gene/environment
interactions. For example, in one study the low-activity MAO-A variant
predicts criminality, but only if coupled with high testosterone levels
(consistent with that, the MAO-A gene also has a promoter responsive to
androgens). In another study low-activity MAO-A participants in an
economic game were more likely than high-activity ones to retaliate
aggressively when exploited by the other player—but only if that
exploitation produced a large economic loss; if the loss was small, there
was no difference. In another study low-activity individuals were more
254