accumbens, in effect, underestimates the magnitude of the delayed
reward, and their dlPFC overestimates the length of the delay.103
Collectively these studies show that our dopaminergic system, frontal
cortex, amygdala, insula, and other members of the chorus code for
differing aspects of reward magnitude, delay, and probability with
varying degrees of accuracy, all influencing whether we manage to do
the harder, more correct thing.104
Individual differences among people in the capacity for gratification
postponement arise from variation in the volume of these individual
neural voices.105 For example, there are abnormalities in dopamine
response profiles during temporal discounting tasks in people with the
maladaptive impulsiveness of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD). Similarly, addictive drugs bias the dopamine system toward
impulsiveness.
Phew. One more complication: These studies of temporal discounting
typically involve delays on the order of seconds. Though the dopamine
system is similar across numerous species, humans do something utterly
novel: we delay gratification for insanely long times. No warthog
restricts calories to look good in a bathing suit next summer. No gerbil
works hard at school to get good SAT scores to get into a good college to
get into a good grad school to get a good job to get into a good nursing
home. We do something even beyond this unprecedented gratification
delay: we use the dopaminergic power of the happiness of pursuit to
motivate us to work for rewards that come after we are dead—depending
on your culture, this can be knowing that your nation is closer to winning
a war because you’ve sacrificed yourself in battle, that your kids will
inherit money because of your financial sacrifices, or that you will spend
eternity in paradise. It is extraordinary neural circuitry that bucks
temporal discounting enough to allow (some of) us to care about the
temperature of the planet that our great-grandchildren will inherit.
Basically, it’s unknown how we humans do this. We may merely be a
type of animal, mammal, primate, and ape, but we’re a profoundly
unique one.
A Final Small Topic: Serotonin
77