None of this will be easy. When contemplating the challenge to do
so, it is important to remember that some, many, maybe even most of the
people who were prosecuting epileptics in the fifteenth century were no
different from us—sincere, cautious, and ethical, concerned about the
serious problems threatening their society, hoping to bequeath their
children a safer world. Just operating with an unrecognizably different
mind-set. The psychological distance from them to us is vast, separated
by the yawning chasm that was the discovery of “It’s not her, it’s her
disease.” Having crossed that divide, the distance we now need to go is
far shorter—it merely consists of taking that same insight and being
willing to see its valid extension in whatever directions science takes us.
The hope is that when it comes to dealing with humans whose
behaviors are among our worst and most damaging, words like “evil”
and “soul” will be as irrelevant as when considering a car with faulty
brakes, that they will be as rarely spoken in a courtroom as in an auto
repair shop. And crucially, the analogy holds in a key way, extending to
instances of dangerous people without anything obviously wrong with
their frontal cortex, genes, and so on. When a car is being dysfunctional
and dangerous and we take it to a mechanic, this is not a dualistic
situation where (a) if the mechanic discovers some broken widget
causing the problem, we have a mechanistic explanation, but (b) if the
mechanic can’t find anything wrong, we’re dealing with an evil car; sure,
the mechanic can speculate on the source of the problem—maybe it’s the
blueprint from which the car was built, maybe it was the building
process, maybe the environment contains some unknown pollutant that
somehow impairs function, maybe someday we’ll have sufficiently
powerful techniques in the auto shop to spot some key molecule in the
engine that is out of whack—but in the meantime we’ll consider this car
to be evil. Car free will also equals “internal forces we do not understand
yet.”*34
Many who are viscerally opposed to this view charge that it is
dehumanizing to frame damaged humans as broken machines. But as a
final, crucial point, doing that is a hell of a lot more humane than
demonizing and sermonizing them as sinners.
613