for victims. It’s the need to know what happened; it’s getting the villain
to say the words; it’s to show the world, “Look what they did to us.”
Recognizing Our Irrationalities
Despite the claims of some economists, we are not rational
optimization machines. We are more generous in games than logic
predicts; we decide if someone is guilty based on reasoning but then
decide their punishment based on emotion; roughly half of us make
different decisions about sacrificing one to save five, depending if it
involves pushing a person versus pulling a lever; we effortlessly resist
cheating in circumstances where no one would know; we make strong
moral decisions without being able to explain why. Thus it’s a good idea
to recognize the systematic features to our irrationality.
Sometimes we aim to eliminate these irrationalities. Perhaps the most
fundamental one is the common visceral resistance to a simple fact—you
don’t make treaties with friends; it’s to be expected that you passionately
hate those whose hands you are about to shake, and that can’t be an
impediment to doing so. Another domain concerns discrepancies
between our conscious opinions and what our implicit biases lead us to
do. As we saw, Us/Them edges can be softened when implicit biases are
made explicit. Doing so need not eliminate that bias—after all, you can’t
readily reason yourself out of a belief that you weren’t originally
reasoned into. Instead, revealing implicit biases indicates where to focus
your monitoring to lessen their impact. This notion can be applied to all
the realms of our behaviors being shaped by something implicit,
subliminal, interoceptive, unconscious, subterranean—and where we
then post-hoc rationalize our stance. For example, every judge should
learn that judicial decisions are sensitive to how long it’s been since they
ate.
Another example to watch out for is the human potential for
irrational optimism. For example, while people might accurately assess
the risk of a behavior, they tend toward distortive optimism when
assessing risk to themselves—“Nah, that couldn’t happen to me.”
Irrational optimism can be great; it’s why only about 15 percent instead
of 99 percent of humans get clinically depressed. But as emphasized by
the Nobel Prize–winning psychologist Daniel Kahneman, irrational
optimism in warfare is disastrous. This can range from the theologically
642