Of course, insofar as metaphorically being dirty and disorderly =
bad, metaphorically being clean and orderly = good.*17 Just consider the
use of the word “neat” in the previous paragraph. Similarly, in Swahili
the word safi, meaning “clean” (from kusafisha, “to clean”), is used in
the same slangy metaphorical sense of “neat” in English. Once while in
Kenya, I was hitching a ride to Nairobi from somewhere out in the
boondocks and got to chatting with a local teenager who was curious
about me. “Where are you going?” he asked. Nairobi. “Nairobi ni [is]
safi,” he said wistfully about the far-off metropolis. How are you going
to keep them down on the farm once they’ve seen the neatness of
Nairobi?
Literal cleanliness and orderliness can release us from abstract
cognitive and affective distress—just consider how, during moments
where life seems to be spiraling out of control, it can be calming to
organize your clothes, clean the living room, get the car washed.18 And
consider how the displaced need to impose cleanliness and order runs
and ruins the lives of people suffering from the archetypal anxiety
disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder. The ability of literal cleanliness
to alter cognition was shown in one study. Subjects examined an array of
music CDs, picked ten that they liked, and ranked them in order of
liking; they were then offered a free copy of one of their midrange
choices (number five or six). Subjects were then distracted with some
other task and then asked to rerank the ten CDs. And they showed a
common psychological phenomenon, which was to now overvalue the
CD they’d been given, ranking it higher on the list than before. Unless
they had just washed their hands (ostensibly to try a new brand of soap),
in which case no reranking occurred. Clean hands, clean slate.
But beginning much further back than the “social hygiene”
movement of the turn of the twentieth century, being metaphorically
neat, pure, and hygienic could be a moral state as well—cleanliness was
not just a good way to avoid uncontrolled diarrhea, dehydration, and
serious electrolyte imbalance, but was also ideal for cozying up to a god.
One study was built around the phenomenon of visceral disgust
making people harsher in their moral judgments. The authors first
replicated this effect, showing that watching a short film clip of
something physically disgusting made subjects more morally judgmental
—unless they had washed their hands after watching the film. Another
563