our earlier metaphor—the neuron now has something to say and it is
screaming its head off. What might things look like then when the
neuron has nothing to say, has not been stimulated? Maybe a state of
equilibrium, where the inside and outside have equal, neutral charges?*
No, never! That’s good enough for some cell in your spleen or your big
toe. But back to that critical issue, that neurons are all about contrasts.
When a neuron has nothing to say, that isn’t some passive state of things
just trickling down to zero. Instead it’s an active process. An active,
intentional, forceful, muscular, sweaty process. Instead of the “I have
nothing to say” state being one of charge neutrality, the inside of the
neuron is negatively charged relative to the outside.
You couldn’t ask for a more dramatic contrast: I have nothing to say
= inside of the neuron is negatively charged. I have something to say =
inside is positive. No neuron ever confuses the two. The internally
negative state is called the “resting potential.” The excited state is called
the “action potential.” And why is generating this dramatic resting
potential such an active process? Because neurons have to work like
crazy, using various pumps in their membranes, to push some positively
charged ions out and to keep some negatively charged ones in, all in
order to generate that negative internal resting state. Along comes an
excitatory signal; the pumps stop working, channels open, and ions rush
this way and that to generate the excitatory positive internal charge. And
when that wave of excitation has passed, the channels close and the
pumps go back into action, regenerating that negative resting potential.
Remarkably, neurons spend nearly half their energy on the pumps that
generate the resting potential. It doesn’t come cheap to generate dramatic
contrasts between having nothing to say and having some exciting news.
Now that we understand resting potentials and action potentials, on
to the other gigantically important detail:
That’s not what action potentials really are. What I’ve just outlined is that a
single dendritic fibril receives an excitatory signal from the previous
neuron (i.e., the previous neuron has had an action potential); this
generates an action potential in that dendrite, which propagates toward
the cell body, over it, on to the axon, to the axon terminals, and signals
the next neuron in line. Not true. Instead:
So the neuron is sitting there with nothing to say, which is to say that
it’s displaying a resting potential; all of its insides are negatively
charged. Along comes an excitatory signal at that one dendritic fibril,
683