Why? Drone pilots do something horrifying and fascinating, a type
of close-range, intimate killing like nothing in history, using imaging
technology of extraordinary quality. A target is identified, and a drone
might be positioned invisibly high in the sky over the person’s house for
weeks, the drone operators always watching, waiting, say, for a gathering
of targets in the house. You watch the target coming and going, eating
dinner, taking a nap on his deck, playing with his kids. And then comes
the command to fire, to release your Hellfire missile at supersonic speed.
Here’s one drone pilot, describing his first “kill”—three Afghanis
targeted from his air force base in Nevada. The missile has hit, and he
watches through an infrared camera, which transmits heat signatures:
The smoke clears, and there’s pieces of the two guys around the
crater. And there’s this guy over here, and he’s missing his right
leg above his knee. He’s holding it, and he’s rolling around, and
the blood is squirting out of his leg, and it’s hitting the ground,
and it’s hot. His blood is hot. But when it hits the ground, it starts
to cool off; the pool cools fast. It took him a long time to die. I
just watched him. I watched him become the same color as the
ground he was lying on.45
But there would be more. Pilots wait to see who retrieves the bodies,
who comes to the funeral, ready to perhaps release another strike. Or in
other circumstances the pilot might watch as an American convoy
approaches a roadside IED booby trap, unable to warn them, or watch
insurgents execute a shrieking civilian begging for mercy.
The pilot above was twenty-one when he made that first kill; he
would eventually accumulate 1,626 drone-mediated kills.* No personal
danger, an omnipresent eye in the sky. He could finish his shift and get a
doughnut on the way home. Yet he and many of his fellow drone pilots
succumb to devastating PTSD.
After reading Grossman, the explanation is simple. The deepest
trauma is not the fear of being killed. It’s doing the close-up,
individuated killing, watching someone for weeks and then turning him
the color of the ground. Grossman cites that during World War II there
were low rates of psychiatric breakdowns among sailors and medics—
people who were just as endangered as infantrymen but killed either
impersonally or not at all.
645