Meanwhile, during stress things aren’t going great in the amygdala.
The region is highly sensitive to glucocorticoids, with lots of
glucocorticoid receptors; stress and glucocorticoids increase excitability
of amygdaloid neurons,* particularly in the basolateral amygdala (the
BLA), with its role in learning fear. Thus, this is another contingent
hormone action—glucocorticoids don’t cause action potentials in
amygdaloid neurons, don’t invent excitation. Instead they amplify
preexisting excitation. Stress and glucocorticoids also increase levels of
CRH in the BLA, and of a growth factor that builds new dendrites and
synapses (brain-derived neurotrophic factor, or BDNF).70
Recall from chapter 2 how during a fearful situation the amygdala
recruits the hippocampus into remembering contextual information about
the event (e.g., the amygdala remembers the thief’s knife, whereas the
hippocampus remembers where the robbery occurred).71 Stress
strengthens this recruitment, making the hippocampus a temporary fear-
laden suburb of the amygdala. Thanks to these glucocorticoid actions in
the amygdala,* stress makes it easier to learn a fear association and to
consolidate it into a long-term memory.
This sets us up for a positive feedback loop. As noted, with the onset
of stress, the amygdala indirectly activates the glucocorticoid stress
response. And in turn glucocorticoids increase amygdala excitability.
Stress also makes it harder to unlearn fear, to “extinguish” a
conditioned fear association. This involves the prefrontal cortex, which
causes fear extinction by inhibiting the BLA (as covered in chapter 2);
stress weakens the PFC’s hold over the amygdala.72
Recall what fear extinction is about. You’ve learned to fearfully
associate a light with a shock, but today the light keeps coming on with
no shock. Extinction is not passively forgetting that light equals shock. It
is the BLA actively learning that light no longer equals shock. Thus
stress facilitates learning fear associations but impairs learning fear
extinction.
Sustained Stress, Executive Function, and
Judgment
Stress compromises other aspects of frontal cortical function.
Working memory is disrupted; in one study, prolonged administration of
126