is not limited by risk; it is limited by our ability to rationalize the
cheating to ourselves.”
Cultural Context
So people make different moral judgments about the same
circumstance depending on whether it’s about them or someone else,
which of their identities has been primed, the language used, how many
steps the intentionality is removed, and even the levels of their stress
hormones, the fullness of their stomach, or the smelliness of their
environment. After chapter 9 it is no surprise that moral decision making
can also vary dramatically by culture. One culture’s sacred cow is
another’s meal, and the discrepancy can be agonizing.
When thinking about cross-cultural differences in morality, key
issues are what universals of moral judgment exist and whether the
universals or the differences are more interesting and important.
Chapter 9 noted some moral stances that are virtually universal,
whether de facto or de jure. These include condemnation of at least some
forms of murder and of theft. Oh, and of some form of sexual practice.
More broadly, there is the near universal of the Golden Rule (with
cultures differing as to whether it is framed as “Do only things you’d
want done to you” or “Don’t do things you wouldn’t want done to you”).
Amid the power of its simplicity, the Golden Rule does not incorporate
people differing as to what they would/wouldn’t want done to them; we
have entered complicated terrain when we can make sense of an
interchange where a masochist says, “Beat me,” and the sadist
sadistically answers, “No.”
This criticism is overcome with the use of a more generalized,
common currency of reciprocity, where we are enjoined to give concern
and legitimacy to the needs and desires of people in circumstances where
we would want the same done for us.
Cross-cultural universals of morality arise from shared categories of
rules of moral behavior. The anthropologist Richard Shweder has
proposed that all cultures recognize rules of morality pertinent to
autonomy, community, and divinity. As we saw in the last chapter,
Jonathan Haidt breaks this continuum into his foundations of morality
that humans have strong intuitions about. These are issues related to
harm, fairness and reciprocity (both of which Shweder would call
494