EMOTIONALLY CONTAGIOUS,
COMPASSIONATE CHILDREN
A
recap of material covered in chapters 6 and 7:
As we saw, a developmental landmark is attaining Theory of
Mind, something necessary but not sufficient for empathy, which paves
the way for increasing abstraction. The capacity for simple sensorimotor
contagion matures into empathic states for someone’s physical pain and,
later, for someone’s emotional pain. There’s the progression from feeling
sorry for an individual (e.g., someone homeless) to feeling sorry for a
category (e.g., “homeless people”). There is increasing cognitive
sophistication, as kids first distinguish between harming an object and
harming a person. Likewise for distinguishing between intentional and
unintentional harm, along with a capacity for moral indignation that is
more readily evoked by the former. Along with this comes a capacity to
express empathy and a sense of responsibility to act upon it, to be
proactively compassionate. Perspective taking matures as well, as the
child transitions from solely being capable of feeling “for” to also feeling
“as if.”
As we saw, the neurobiology of this developmental arc makes sense.
At the age where an empathic state is evoked only by someone’s physical
pain, brain activation centers on the periaqueductal gray (PAG), a fairly
low-level way station in the brain’s pain circuitry. Once emotional pain
can evoke an empathic state, the profile is mostly about coupled
activation between the (emotional) vmPFC and limbic structures. As the
capacity for moral indignation matures, coupling among the vmPFC, the
insula, and amygdala emerges. And as perspective taking comes into
play, the vmPFC is increasingly coupled to regions associated with
Theory of Mind (like the temporoparietal junction).
This was our picture of empathic states in kids being built upon the
cognitive foundation of Theory of Mind and perspective taking. But as
we also saw, there are empathic states earlier on—infants showing
emotional contagion, a toddler trying to comfort a crying adult by
offering her stuffie, long before textbook Theory of Mind occurs. And
526