Diallo. Diallo, a West African immigrant in New York, matched a
description of a rapist. Four white officers questioned him, and when the
unarmed Diallo started to pull out his wallet, they decided it was a gun
and fired forty-one shots. The underlying neurobiology concerns “event-
related potentials” (ERPs), which are stimulus-induced changes in
electrical activity of the brain (as assessed by EEG—
electroencephalography). Threatening faces produce a distinctive change
(called the P200 component) in the ERP waveform in under two hundred
milliseconds. Among white subjects, viewing someone black evokes a
stronger P200 waveform than viewing someone white, regardless of
whether the person is armed. Then, a few milliseconds later, a second,
inhibitory waveform (the N200 component) appears, originating from
the frontal cortex—“Let’s think a sec about what we’re seeing before we
shoot.” Viewing a black individual evokes less of an N200 waveform
than does seeing someone white. The greater the P200/N200 ratio (i.e.,
the greater the ratio of I’m-feeling-threatened to Hold-on-a-sec), the
greater the likelihood of shooting an unarmed black individual. In
another study subjects had to identify fragmented pictures of objects.
Priming white subjects with subliminal views of black (but not white)
faces made them better at detecting pictures of weapons (but not cameras
or books).14
Finally, for the same criminal conviction, the more stereotypically
African a black individual’s facial features, the longer the sentence.15 In
contrast, juries view black (but not white) male defendants more
favorably if they’re wearing big, clunky glasses; some defense attorneys
even exploit this “nerd defense” by accessorizing their clients with fake
glasses, and prosecuting attorneys ask whether those dorky glasses are
real. In other words, when blind, impartial justice is supposedly being
administered, jurors are unconsciously biased by racial stereotypes of
someone’s face.
This is so depressing—are we hardwired to fear the face of someone
of another race, to process their face less as a face, to feel less empathy?
No. For starters, there’s tremendous individual variation—not everyone’s
amygdala activates in response to an other-race face, and those
exceptions are informative. Moreover, subtle manipulations rapidly
change the amygdaloid response to the face of an Other. This will be
covered in chapter 11.
87