but, dang, they sure know how to make money, and you probably should
go to one who is a doctor if you have something serious.
People tend toward consistent feelings evoked by each of the
extremes. For high warmth, high competence (i.e., Us), there’s pride.
Low warmth, high competence—envy. High warmth, low competence—
pity. Low warmth, low competence—disgust. Stick someone in a brain
scanner, show them pictures of low-warmth/low-competence people, and
there’s activation of the amygdala and insula but not of the fusiform face
area or the (emotional) vmPFC—a profile evoked by viewing disgusting
objects (although, once again, this pattern shifts if you get subjects to
individuate, asking them to think about what food this homeless person
likes, rather than “anything they can find in garbage cans”).* In contrast,
viewing low-warmth/high-competence or high-warmth/low-competence
individuals activates the vmPFC.
The places between the extremes evoke their own characteristic
responses. Individuals who evoke a reaction between pity and pride
evoke a desire to help them. Floating between pity and disgust is a desire
to exclude and demean. Between pride and envy is a desire to associate,
to derive benefits from. And between envy and disgust are our most
hostile urges to attack.
What fascinates me is when someone’s categorization changes. The
most straightforward ones concern shifts from high-warmth/high-
competence (HH) status:
HH to HL: This is watching a parent decline into dementia, a
situation evoking extremes of poignant protectiveness.
HH to LH: This is the business partner who turns out to have been
embezzling for decades. Betrayal.
And the rare transition from HH to LL—a buddy who made partner
in your law firm, but then “something happened” and now he’s
homeless. Disgust mingled with bafflement—what went wrong?
Equally interesting are shifts from other categorizations. There’s
when you shift your perception of someone from HL to LL—the janitor
whom you condescendingly greet each day turns out to think you’re a
jerk. Ingrate.
There’s the shift from LL to LH. When I was a kid in the sixties, the
parochial American view of Japan was LL—the shadow of World War II
generating dislike and contempt—“Made in Japan” was about cheap
plastic gewgaws. And then, suddenly, “Made in Japan” meant
414