sloppy, and some androgenic steroids are inadvertently produced; since
evolution is lazy and hasn’t eliminated androgen receptors in female
brains, there’s some androgen-driven aggression.
These views are wrong for a number of reasons.
Female brains don’t contain androgen receptors simply because they
come from a similar blueprint as male brains. Instead, androgen
receptors are distributed differently in the brains of females and males,
with higher levels in some regions in females. There has been active
selection for androgen effects in females.55
Even more important, female aggression makes sense—females can
increase their evolutionary fitness with strategic, instrumental
aggression.56 Depending on the species, females compete aggressively
for resources (e.g., food or nesting places), harass lower-ranking
reproductive competitors into stress-induced infertility, or kill each
other’s infants (as in chimps). And in the bird and (rare) primate species
where males are actually paternal, females compete aggressively for such
princes.
Remarkably, there are even species—primates (bonobos, lemurs,
marmosets, and tamarins), rock hyraxes, and rodents (the California
mouse, Syrian golden hamsters, and naked mole rats)—where females
are socially dominant and more aggressive (and often more muscular)
than males.57 The most celebrated example of a sex-reversal system is
the spotted hyena, shown by Laurence Frank of UC Berkeley and
colleagues.* Among typical social carnivores (e.g., lions), females do
most of the hunting, after which males show up and eat first. Among
hyenas it’s the socially subordinate males who hunt; they are then booted
off the kill by females so that the kids eat first. Get this: In many
mammals erections are a sign of dominance, of a guy strutting his stuff.
Among hyenas it’s reversed—when a female is about to terrorize a male,
he gets an erection. (“Please don’t hurt me! Look, I’m just a
nonthreatening male.”)*
What explains female competitive aggression (in sex-reversal species
or “normal” animals)? Those androgens in females are obvious suspects,
and in some sex-reversal species females have androgen levels that equal
or even trump those in males.58 Among hyenas, where this occurs,
spending fetal life awash in Mom’s plentiful androgens produces a
“pseudo-hermaphrodite”*—female hyenas have a fake scrotal sack, no
external vagina, and a clitoris that is as large as a penis and gets erect as
117