“biological” or “organic” in some nebulous manner than
if he had committed the same act with a normal PFC.
However, the guy’s awful, impulsive act is equally
“biological” with or without a PFC. The sole difference
is that the workings of the PFC-less brain are easier to
understand with our primitive research tools.
So What Does All of This Tell Us?
Sometimes these studies tell us what different brain regions do. They
are getting fancier, telling us about circuits, thanks to the growing time
resolution of neuroimaging, transitioning from “This stimulus activates
brain regions A, B, C” to “This stimulus activates both A and B, and
then C, and C activates only if B does”. And identifying what specific
regions/circuits do gets harder as studies become subtler. Consider, for
example, the fusiform face area. As discussed in the next chapter, it is a
cortical region that responds to faces in humans and other primates. We
primates sure are social creatures.
But work by Isabel Gauthier of Vanderbilt University demonstrates
something more complicated. Show pictures of different cars, and the
fusiform activates—in automobile aficionados.112 Show pictures of
birds, and ditto among bird-watchers. The fusiform isn’t about faces; it’s
about recognizing examples of things from categories that are
emotionally salient to each individual.
Thus, studying behavior is useful for understanding the nature of the
brain—ah, isn’t it interesting that behavior A arises from the coupling of
brain regions X and Y. And sometimes studying the brain is useful for
understanding the nature of behavior—ah, isn’t it interesting that brain
region A is central to both behavior X and behavior Y. For example, to
me the most interesting thing about the amygdala is its dual involvement
in both aggression and fear; you can’t understand the former without
recognizing the relevance of the latter.
—
A final point related to the core of this book: While this neurobiology is
mighty impressive, the brain is not where a behavior “begins.” It’s
merely the final common pathway by which all the factors in the
chapters to come converge and create behavior.
81