the New Yorker who was raped and stabbed to death over the course of
an hour outside an apartment building, while thirty-eight people heard
her shrieks for help and didn’t bother calling the police. Despite that
being reported by the New York Times, and the collective indifference
becoming emblematic of all that’s wrong with people, the facts differed:
the number was less than thirty-eight, no one witnessed the entire event,
apartment windows were closed on that winter’s night, and most
assumed they were hearing the muffled sounds of a lover’s quarrel.*
The mythic elements of the Genovese case prompt the quasi myth
that in an emergency requiring brave intervention, the more people
present, the less likely anyone is to help—“There’s lots of people here;
someone else will step forward.” The bystander effect does occur in
nondangerous situations, where the price of stepping forward is
inconvenience. However, in dangerous situations, the more people
present, the more likely individuals are to step forward. Why? Perhaps
elements of reputation, where a larger crowd equals more witnesses to
one’s heroics.
Another rapid social-context effect shows men in some of their
lamest moments.37 Specifically, when women are present, or when men
are prompted to think about women, they become more risk-taking, show
steeper temporal discounting in economic decisions, and spend more on
luxury items (but not on mundane expenses).* Moreover, the allure of
the opposite sex makes men more aggressive—for example, more likely
in a competitive game to punish the opposing guy with loud blasts of
noise. Crucially, this is not inevitable—in circumstances where status is
achieved through prosocial routes, the presence of women makes men
more prosocial. As summarized in the title of one paper demonstrating
this, this seems a case of “Male generosity as a mating signal.” We’ll
return to this theme in the next chapter.
Thus, our social environment unconsciously shapes our behavior
over the course of minutes. As does our physical environment.
Now we come to the “broken window” theory of crime of James Q.
Wilson and George Kelling.38 They proposed that small signs of urban
disarray—litter, graffiti, broken windows, public drunkenness—form a
slippery slope leading to larger signs of disarray, leading to increased
crime. Why? Because litter and graffiti as the norm mean people don’t
care or are powerless to do anything, constituting an invitation to litter or
worse.
94