No surprise, compliance becomes easier when the victim is an
abstraction—say, the future generations who will inherit this planet. In
Milgram follow-ups, compliance declined if the learner was in the same
room as the teacher and would plummet if the two had shaken hands.
Ditto if psychological distance was shortened by perspective taking—
what would it feel like if you were in their shoes?
Predictably, compliance is also decreased when the victim is
individuated.79 However, don’t let the authority individuate victims for
you. In one classic Milgram-esque study, the scientists would
“accidentally” allow a teacher to overhear their opinion of the learner.
“Seems like a nice guy” versus “This guy seems like an animal.” Guess
who’d get more shocks?
Authorities rarely ask us to administer shocks to those whom they
label as nice guys. It’s always to the animals. Implicit in the latter
categorization’s evoking more compliance is our having ceded power to
the authorities or to the group to create the narrative. One of the greatest
wellsprings of resistance is to seize back the narrative. From “children of
exceptionalities” to the Paralympics, from gay-pride marches to “never
again,” from Hispanic Heritage Month to James Brown singing, “Say It
Out Loud, I’m Black and I’m Proud,” a major step toward victims’
resistance is to gain the power to define themselves.
THINGS BROUGHT TO THE TABLE BY THE PERSON BEING PRESSURED
Some personality traits predict resistance to the pressure to comply:
not valuing being conscientious or agreeable; being low in neuroticism;
scoring low on right-wing authoritarianism (any particular authority is
more likely to be questioned if you already question the very concept of
authority); social intelligence, which may be mediated by an enhanced
ability to understand things like scapegoating or ulterior motives. And
where these individual differences come from is, of course, the end
product of most of the preceding chapters.80
What about gender? Milgram-like studies have shown that women
average higher rates than men of voicing resistance to the demands to
obey . . . but higher rates, nonetheless, of ultimately complying. Other
studies show that women have higher rates than men of public
conformity and lower rates of private conformity. Overall, though,
gender is not much of a predictor. Interestingly, rates of conformity in
Asch-like studies increase in mixed-sex groups. When in the presence of
472