there—for the poor, adulthood consists of the socially dominant treating
them in an authoritarian manner.
Class differences in parenting were explored in a classic study by the
anthropologist Adrie Kusserow of St. Michael’s College, who did
fieldwork observing parents in three tribes—wealthy families on
Manhattan’s Upper East Side; a stable, blue-collar community; and a
poor, crime-ridden one (the last two both in Queens).58 The differences
were fascinating.
Parenting in the poor neighborhood involved “hard defensive
individualism.” The neighborhood was rife with addiction,
homelessness, incarceration, death—and parents’ aim was to shelter their
child from the literal and metaphorical street. Their speech was full of
metaphors about not losing what was achieved—standing your ground,
keeping up your pride, not letting others get under your skin. Parenting
was authoritarian, toughening the goal. For example, parents teased kids
far more than in the other neighborhoods.
In contrast, working-class parenting involved “hard offensive
individualism.” Parents had some socioeconomic momentum, and kids
were meant to maintain that precarious trajectory. Parents’ speech about
their hopes for their kids contained images of movement, progress, and
athletics—getting ahead, testing the waters, going for the gold. With hard
work and the impetus of generations of expectations, your child might
pioneer landfall in the middle class.
Parenting in both neighborhoods emphasized respect for authority,
particularly within the family. Moreover, kids were fungible members of
a category, rather than individualized—“You kids get over here.”
Then there was the “soft individualism” of upper-middle-class
parenting.* Children’s eventual success, by conventional standards, was
a given, as were expectations of physical health. Far more vulnerable
was a child’s psychological health; when children could become
anything, parents’ responsibility was to facilitate their epic journey
toward an individuated “fulfillment.” Moreover, the image of fulfillment
was often postconventional—“I hope my child will never work an
unsatisfying job just for money.” This, after all, is a tribe giddied by tales
of the shark in line to become CEO chucking it to learn carpentry or
oboe. Parents’ speech brimmed with metaphors of potential being
fulfilled—flowering, blooming, growing, blossoming. Parenting was
authoritative or permissive, riddled with ambivalence about parent-child
209