between BLA and central amygdala neurons; some of the genes involved
have even been identified.
We’ve now got learning to be afraid under our belts.*21 Now
conditions change—the tone still occurs now and then, but no more
shock. Gradually the conditioned fear response abates. How does “fear
extinction” occur? How do we learn that this person wasn’t so scary after
all, that different doesn’t necessarily equal frightening? Recall how a
subset of BLA neurons respond to the tone only once conditioning has
occurred. Another population does the opposite, responding to the tone
once it’s no longer signaling shock (logically, the two populations of
neurons inhibit each other). Where do these “Ohhh, the tone isn’t scary
anymore” neurons get inputs from? The frontal cortex. When we stop
fearing something, it isn’t because some amygdaloid neurons have lost
their excitability. We don’t passively forget that something is scary. We
actively learn that it isn’t anymore.*
The amygdala also plays a logical role in social and emotional
decision making. In the Ultimatum Game, an economic game involving
two players, the first makes an offer as to how to divide a pot of money,
which the other player either accepts or rejects.22 If the latter, neither
gets anything. Research shows that rejecting an offer is an emotional
decision, triggered by anger at a lousy offer and the desire to punish. The
more the amygdala activation in the second player after an offer, the
more likely the rejection. People with damaged amygdalae are atypically
generous in the Ultimatum Game and don’t increase rejection rates if
they start receiving unfair offers.
Why? These individuals understand the rules and can give sound,
strategic advice to other players. Moreover, they use the same strategies
as control subjects in a nonsocial version of the game, when believing
the other player is a computer. And they don’t have a particularly long
view, undistracted by the amygdala’s emotional tumult, reasoning that
their noncontingent generosity will induce reciprocity and pay off in the
long run. When asked, they anticipate the same levels of reciprocity as
do controls.
Instead, these findings suggest that the amygdala injects implicit
distrust and vigilance into social decision making.23 All thanks to
learning. In the words of the authors of the study, “The generosity in the
trust game of our BLA-damaged subjects might be considered
pathological altruism, in the sense that inborn altruistic behaviors have
43