Recall the shortcut to the amygdala discussed in the previous chapter,
when sensory information enters the brain. Most is funneled through that
sensory way station in the thalamus and then to appropriate cortical
region (e.g., the visual or auditory cortex) for the slow, arduous process
of decoding light pixels, sound waves, and so on into something
identifiable. And finally information about it (“It’s Mozart”) is passed to
the limbic system.
As we saw, there’s that shortcut from the thalamus directly to the
amygdala, such that while the first few layers of, say, the visual cortex
are futzing around with unpacking a complex image, the amygdala is
already thinking, “That’s a gun!” and reacting. And as we saw, there’s
the trade-off: information reaches the amygdala fast but is often
inaccurate.16 The amygdala thinks it knows what it’s seeing before the
frontal cortex slams on the brakes; an innocent man reaches for his
wallet and dies.
Other types of subliminal visual information influence the brain.17
For example, the gender of a face is processed within 150 milliseconds.
Ditto with social status. Social dominance looks the same across cultures
—direct gaze, open posture (e.g., leaning back with arms behind the
head), while subordination is signaled with averted gaze, arms sheltering
the torso. After a mere 40-millisecond exposure, subjects accurately
distinguish high- from low-status presentations. As we’ll see in chapter
12, when people are figuring out stable status relations, logical areas of
the frontal cortex (the vmPFC and dlPFC) activate; but in the case of
unstable, flip-flopping relations, the amygdala also activates. It’s
unsettling when we’re unsure who gets ulcers and who gives them.
There’s also subliminal cuing about beauty.18 From an early age, in
both sexes and across cultures, attractive people are judged to be smarter,
kinder, and more honest. We’re more likely to vote for attractive people
or hire them, less likely to convict them of crimes, and, if they are
convicted, more likely to dole out shorter sentences. Remarkably, the
medial orbitofrontal cortex assesses both the beauty of a face and the
goodness of a behavior, and its level of activity during one of those tasks
predicts the level during the other. The brain does similar things when
contemplating beautiful minds, hearts, and cheekbones. And assumes
that cheekbones tell something about minds and hearts. This will be
covered in chapter 12.
88