ended it, tossed down their guns, could have ignored or ridiculed or
killed any objecting officer spouting obscenities about God and country,
could have gone home to kiss their loved ones and then face the real
enemy, the bloated aristocracy who would sacrifice them for their own
power.
—
It is easy to have this fantasy about the Great War, a distant museum
piece festooned with twirly mustaches and silly plumed officers’
helmets. It behooves us to step back from the grainy black-and-white
photos and to consider a hugely difficult thought experiment. Our
contemporary adversaries kidnap girls and sell them into slavery, commit
atrocities and, instead of concealing them, display the evidence online.
When I read the news of the things they’ve done, I hate them
passionately. It’s impossible to imagine kicking back, having a group
sing-along of “I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus” and exchanging
Christmas tchotchkes with Al-Qaeda grunts.
Yet time does interesting things. The hatred between Americans and
Japanese during World War II was boundless. American recruiting
posters advertised “Jap Hunting Licenses”; one veteran of the Pacific
theater described a common event, writing in the Atlantic in 1946:
[American soldiers] “boiled the flesh off enemy skulls to make table
ornaments for sweethearts, or carved their bones into letter openers.”59
And there’s the bestial treatment of American POWs by the Japanese. If
Richard Fiske had wound up a POW, Zenji Abe might have helped
march him to death; if the former had killed the latter in battle, he might
have made a souvenir of his skull. And instead, more than fifty years
later, one would write a letter of condolence to the other’s grandchildren
upon the death of Grandpa.
—
A key point of the previous chapter was that those in the future will look
back on us and be appalled at what we did amid our scientific ignorance.
A key challenge in this chapter is to recognize how likely we are to
eventually look back at our current hatreds and find them mysterious.
Daniel Dennett has pondered a scenario of someone undergoing
surgery without anesthesia but with absolute knowledge that afterward
they’d receive a drug that would erase all memory of the event. Would
668