toward empathy, or the subjective sense of empathy they are feeling in
the situation.
This makes sense, given the workings of the insula and amygdala. As
we saw, their involvement in empathic states emerges developmentally
as kids first embed empathy in context and causality—why is this person
in pain, and whose fault is it? This is obvious when pain is rooted in
injustice, when disgust, indignation, and anger sweep in because we
know that this pain could have been prevented, that someone profited
from it. Even when it is unclear that a cause of pain lies in injustice, we
seek attribution—the intertwining of the ACC with the insula and
amygdala is our world of scapegoating. And that pattern is so often there
even when pain is random, without human agency or villainy—literal or
metaphorical tectonic plates shift, the earth opens up and swallows
someone innocent, and we rail against the people who deprived that
victim of a happier life before the tragedy struck, against the God behind
this act of God, against the mechanistic indifference of the universe. And
as we will see, the more the purity of empathy is clouded with the anger,
disgust, and indignation of blame, the harder it is to actually help.
The Cognitive Side of Things
When do the more cognitive components of an empathic state—the
PFC, the dlPFC in particular, along with Theory of Mind networks such
as the temporoparietal juncture (TPJ) and superior central sulcus—come
more to the forefront? Obviously, and uninterestingly, when it’s
challenging to even figure out what’s going on—“Wait, who won the
game?” “Do I want my pieces to surround or be surrounded by the other
person’s?”
More interesting is when more cognitive brain circuitry is recruited
by issues of causation and intentionality: “Wait, does he have a horrible
headache because he’s a migrant farm worker who was sprayed with
pesticide, or because he’s been binge drinking with his frat bros?” “Did
this AIDS patient get his HIV from a blood transfusion or drug use?
(People show more activation of the ACC for the former.) This is
precisely what chimps have thought through when comforting an
innocent victim of aggression but not an instigator. As we saw in chapter
7, the more cognitive profile of activation emerges when kids start
distinguishing between self- and other-inflicted pain. In the words of
531