THE NATURE AND VARIETIES OF
HIERARCHIES
F
or starters, a hierarchy is a ranking system that formalizes unequal
access to limited resources, ranging from meat to that nebulous
thing called “prestige.” We begin by examining hierarchies in other
species (with the proviso that not all social species have hierarchies).
The textbook 1960s picture of hierarchies in other species was
straightforward. A group forms a stable, linear hierarchy where the alpha
individual dominates everyone, the beta individual dominates everyone
except the alpha, gamma everyone except alpha and beta, and so on.
Hierarchies establish a status quo by ritualizing inequalities. Two
baboons encounter something good—say, a spot shaded from the sun.
Without stable dominance relations, there’s a potentially injurious fight.
Likewise over the figs in a fruiting tree an hour later, and for the chance
to be groomed by someone after that, etc. Instead, fights rarely occur,
and if a subordinate forgets his status, a “threat yawn”—a ritualistic
display of canines—from the dominant male usually suffices.*,*2
Why have ranking systems? The answer, circa 1960s, was Marlin
Perkins group selection, where a species benefits from a stable social
system in which everyone knows their place. This view was fostered by
the primatological belief that in a hierarchy the alpha individual (i.e., the
one who gets first dibs on anything good) was in some manner a “leader”
who does something useful for the group. This was emphasized by the
Harvard primatologist Irven DeVore, who reported that among savanna
baboons, the alpha male led the troop in each day’s direction of foraging,
led communal hunts, defended everyone against lions, disciplined the
kids, changed the lightbulbs, etc. This turned out to be nonsense. Alpha
males don’t know which direction to go (given that they transfer into
troops as adolescents). No one follows them anyway; instead everyone
follows the old females, who do know. Hunts are disorganized free-for-
alls. And an alpha male might face down a lion to protect a kid—if the
kid is probably his own. Otherwise, he’d grab the safest spot.
428