UNIVERSAL RULES VERSUS KNOBBY
KNEES
E
thology formed in Europe in the early twentieth century in response
to an American brand of psychology, “behaviorism.” Behaviorism
descended from the introduction’s John Watson; the field’s famed
champion was B. F. Skinner. Behaviorists cared about universalities of
behavior across species. They worshipped a doozy of a seeming
universal concerning stimulus and response: rewarding an organism for a
behavior makes the organism more likely to repeat that behavior, while
failure to get rewarded or, worse, punishment for it, makes the organism
less likely to repeat it. Any behavior can be made more or less common
through “operant conditioning” (a term Skinner coined), the process of
controlling the rewards and punishments in the organism’s environment.
Thus, for behaviorists (or “Skinnerians,” a term Skinner labored to
make synonymous) virtually any behavior could be “shaped” into greater
or lesser frequency or even “extinguished” entirely.
If all behaving organisms obeyed these universal rules, you might as
well study a convenient species. Most behaviorist research was done on
rats or, Skinner’s favorite, pigeons. Behaviorists loved data, no-nonsense
hard numbers; these were generated by animals pressing or pecking
away at levers in “operant conditioning boxes” (aka “Skinner boxes”).
And anything discovered applied to any species. A pigeon is a rat is a
boy, Skinner preached. Soulless droid.*
Behaviorists were often right about behavior but wrong in really
important ways, as many interesting behaviors don’t follow behaviorist
rules.*1 Raise an infant rat or monkey with an abusive mother, and it
becomes more attached to her. And behaviorist rules have failed when
humans love the wrong abusive person.
Meanwhile, ethology was emerging in Europe. In contrast with
behaviorism’s obsession with uniformity and universality of behavior,
ethologists loved behavioral variety. They’d emphasize how every
species evolves unique behaviors in response to unique demands, and
how one had to open-mindedly observe animals in their natural habitats
83