annually), joint efforts to combat terrorism, joint efforts to facilitate
tourism between the countries. But it wasn’t until a year later that one
saw evidence that something resembling a true peace was forming. It
followed the creation of yet another martyr for peace, the assassination
of Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin, one of the architects of the Oslo
Peace Accord, by a right-wing Israeli extremist. Extraordinarily, King
Hussein came to Rabin’s funeral and eulogized him, addressing his
widow in the front row:
My sister, Mrs. Leah Rabin, my friends, I had never thought that
the moment would come like this when I would grieve the loss of
a brother, a colleague and a friend.
Hussein’s presence and words were obviously irrelevant to any of the
rational stumbling blocks to peace. And were immeasurably important.30
A similar arc can be seen in Northern Ireland, where an IRA
ceasefire in 1994 facilitated an end to the violence of the Troubles and
the 1998 Good Friday Agreement laid the groundwork for Republicans
and Unionists to coexist, for ex-Unionist demagogues and ex-IRA
gunmen to serve in a government together. Much of the agreement was
material or instrumental, but there were elements of sacred values
addressed—for example, the establishment of a Parades Commission to
ensure that neither group had inflammatory, symbol-laden parades in the
other’s neighborhoods in Belfast. But in many ways the most palpable
sign of a lasting peace came from an unexpected corner. The unity
government formed after the agreement was led by Peter Robinson as
first minister and Martin McGuinness as deputy first minister. The
former had been a Unionist firebrand, the latter a leader of the political
wing of the IRA; they were two men who epitomized the hatreds of the
Troubles. They had a functional working relationship but nothing more
than that and had famously refused to ever actually shake hands
(something that even Rabin and Yasir Arafat had managed). What finally
broke the ice? In 2010 Robinson was upended in a major scandal
involving his politician wife, who had committed some major financial
improprieties in the name of another type of impropriety—funneling
money to her nineteen-year-old lover. And history was then made when
578