member, Them showing fear might even be good news—if it scares
Them, bring it on. Moreover, recall from chapter 3 the “isomorphic
sensorimotor” reflex of tensing your hand when watching a hand being
poked with a needle; the reflex is stronger if it is a same-race hand.20
As we saw, people are more likely to make amends for transgressions
against Us than against Them. What about responses to other in-group
members violating a norm?
Most common is forgiving Us more readily than Them. As we will
see, this is often rationalized—we screw up because of special
circumstances; They screw up because that’s how They are.
Something interesting can happen when someone’s transgression
constitutes airing the group’s dirty laundry that affirms a negative
stereotype. The resulting in-group shame can provoke high levels of
punishment as a signal to outsiders.21
The United States, with its rationalizations and ambivalences about
ethnicity, provides many such examples. Consider Rudy Giuliani, who
grew up in Brooklyn in an Italian American enclave dominated by
organized crime (Giuliani’s father served time for armed robbery and
then worked for his brother-in-law, a Mob loan shark). Giuliani rose to
national prominence in 1985 as the attorney prosecuting the “Five
Families” in the Mafia Commission Trial, effectively destroying them.
He was strongly motivated to counter the stereotype of “Italian
American” as synonymous with organized crime. When referring to his
accomplishment, he said, “And if that’s not enough to remove the Mafia
prejudice, then there probably could not be anything you could do to
remove it.” If you want someone to prosecute mafiosi with tireless
intensity, get a proud Italian American outraged by the stereotypes
generated by the Mob.22
Similar motivations were widely ascribed to Chris Darden, the
African American attorney who was cocounsel for the prosecution in the
O. J. Simpson trial. Ditto for the trial of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg and
Morton Sobell, all Jewish, accused of spying for the Soviet Union. The
very public prosecution was by two Jews, Roy Cohn and Irving Saypol,
and presided over by a Jewish judge, Irving Kaufman, all eager to
counter the stereotype of Jews as disloyal “internationalists.” After death
sentences were doled out, Kaufman was honored by the American
Jewish Committee, the Anti-Defamation League, and the Jewish War
Veterans.*23 Giuliani, Darden, Cohn, Saypol, and Kaufman show that
398