longer live with us”; guilt is when you say, “How am I going to live with
myself?”*
From the time that Benedict first articulated this contrast, there has
been a self-congratulatory view in the West that shame is somehow more
primitive than guilt, as the West has left behind dunce caps, public
flogging, and scarlet letters. Shame is the mob; guilt is internalizing
rules, laws, edicts, decrees, and statutes. Yet, Jacquet convincingly
argues for the continued usefulness of shaming in the West, calling for its
rebirth in a postmodernist form. For her, shaming is particularly useful
when the powerful show no evidence of feeling guilt and evade
punishment. We have no shortage of examples of such evasion in the
American legal system, where one can benefit from the best defense that
money or power can buy; shaming can often step into that vacuum.
Consider a 1999 scandal at UCLA, when more than a dozen healthy,
strapping football players were discovered to have used connections,
made-up disabilities, and forged doctors’ signatures to get handicapped
parking permits. Their privileged positions resulted in what was
generally seen as slaps on the wrist by both the courts and UCLA.
However, the element of shaming may well have made up for it—as they
left the courthouse in front of the press, they walked past a phalanx of
disabled, wheelchair-bound individuals jeering them.31
Anthropologists, studying everyone from hunter-gatherers to
urbanites, have found that about two thirds of everyday conversation is
gossip, with the vast majority of it being negative. As has been said,
gossip (with the goal of shaming) is a weapon of the weak against the
powerful. It has always been fast and cheap and is infinitely more so now
in the era of the Scarlet Internet.
Shaming is also effective when dealing with outrages by
corporations.32 Bizarrely, the American legal system considers a
corporation to be an individual in many ways, one that is psychopathic in
the sense of having no conscience and being solely interested in profits.
The people running a corporation are occasionally criminally responsible
when the corporation has done something illegal; however, they are not
when the corporation does something legal yet immoral—it is outside the
realm of guilt. Jacquet emphasizes the potential power of shaming
campaigns, such as those that forced Nike to change its policies about
the horrific working conditions in its overseas sweatshops, or paper giant
Kimberly-Clark to address the cutting of old-growth forests.
502