The usual—results aren’t terribly consistent from one
study to the next.
The usual—effect sizes are small. Knowing what variant
of a candidate gene someone has (or even what variants
of a collection of genes) doesn’t help much in predicting
their behavior.
A major reason is that, after getting a handle on 5HTT
and DRD4 interactions, there are still roughly 19,998
more human genes and a gazillion more environments to
study. Time to switch to the other main approach—
looking at all those 20,000 genes at once.
Fishing Expeditions, Instead of Looking Where
the Light Is
The small effect sizes reflect a limitation in the candidate gene
approach; in scientific lingo, the problem is that one is only looking
where the light is. The cliché harks back to a joke: You discover
someone at night, searching the ground under a street lamp. “What’s
wrong?” “I dropped my ring; I’m looking for it.” Trying to be helpful,
you ask, “Were you standing on this side or that side of the lamp when
you dropped it?” “Oh, no, I was over by those trees when I dropped it.”
“Then why are you searching here?” “This is where the light is.” With
candidate gene approaches, you look only where the light is, examine
only genes that you already know are involved. And with twenty
thousand or so genes, it’s pretty safe to assume there are still some
interesting genes that you don’t know about yet. The challenge is to find
them.
The most common way of trying to find them all is with genomewide
association studies (GWAS).59 Examine, say, the gene for hemoglobin
and look at the eleventh nucleotide in the sequence; everyone will pretty
much have the same DNA letter in that spot. However, there are little hot
spots of variability, single nucleotides where, say, two different DNA
letters occur, each in about 50 percent of the population (and where this
typically doesn’t change the amino acid being specified, because of
DNA redundancy). There are more than a million of such “SNPs”
(single-nucleotide polymorphisms) scattered throughout the genome—in
260