DISGUST AND PURITY
T
his is our familiar domain of the insular cortex. If you bite into
rancid food, the insula activates, just as in every other mammal.
You wrinkle your nose, raise your upper lip, narrow your eyes, all to
protect mouth, eyes, and nasal cavities. Your heart slows. You reflexively
spit out the food, gag, perhaps even vomit. All to protect yourself from
toxins and infectious pathogens.11
As humans we do some fancier things: Think about rancid food, and
the insula activates. Look at faces showing disgust, or subjectively
unattractive faces, and the same occurs. And most important, if you think
about a truly reprehensible act, the same occurs. The insula mediates
visceral responses to norm violations, and the more activation, the more
condemnation. And this is visceral, not just metaphorically visceral—for
example, when I heard about the Sandy Hook Elementary School
massacre, “feeling sick to my stomach” wasn’t a mere figure of speech.
When I imagined the reality of the murder of twenty first-graders and the
six adults protecting them, I felt nauseous. The insula not only prompts
the stomach to purge itself of toxic food; it prompts the stomach to purge
the reality of a nightmarish event. The distance between the symbolic
message and the meaning disappears.12
The linking of visceral and moral disgust is bidirectional. As shown
in a number of studies, contemplating a morally disgusting act leaves
more than a metaphorical bad taste in your mouth—people eat less
immediately afterward, and a neutral-tasting beverage drunk afterward is
rated as having a more negative taste (and, conversely, hearing about
virtuous moral acts made the drink taste better).13
In chapters 12 and 13 we saw the political implications of our brains
intermixing visceral and moral disgust—social conservatives have a
lower threshold for visceral disgust than do social progressives; the
“wisdom of repugnance” school posits that being viscerally disgusted by
something is a pretty good indicator that it is morally wrong; implicitly
evoking a sense of visceral disgust (e.g., by sitting in close proximity to a
foul odor) makes us more socially conservative.14 This is not merely
561