force studies. First they engineered the brains of male mice to express
the prairie vole version of the vasopressin receptor in their brains, and
they groomed and huddled more with familiar females (but not with
strangers). Then the scientists engineered the brains of male montane
voles to have more vasopressin receptors in the nucleus accumbens; the
males became more socially affiliative with individual females.*
What about versions of vasopressin receptor genes in other species?
When compared with chimps, bonobos have a variant associated with
more receptor expression and far more social bonding between females
and males (although, in contrast to prairie voles, bonobos are anything
but monogamous).27
How about humans? This is tough to study, because you can’t
measure these neuropeptides in tiny brain regions in humans and instead
have to examine levels in the circulation, a fairly indirect measure.
Nevertheless, these neuropeptides appear to play a role in human
pair-bonding.28 For starters, circulating oxytocin levels are elevated in
couples when they’ve first hooked up. Furthermore, the higher the levels,
the more physical affection, the more behaviors are synchronized, the
more long-lasting the relationship, and the happier interviewers rate
couples to be.
Even more interesting were studies where oxytocin (or a control
spray) was administered intranasally. In one fun study, couples had to
discuss one of their conflicts; oxytocin up their noses, and they’d be
rated as communicating more positively and would secrete less stress
hormones. Another study suggests that oxytocin unconsciously
strengthens the pair-bond. Heterosexual male volunteers, with or without
an oxytocin spritz, interacted with an attractive female researcher, doing
some nonsense task. Among men in stable relationships, oxytocin
increased their distance from the woman an average of four to six inches.
Single guys, no effect. (Why didn’t oxytocin make them stand closer?
The researchers indicated that they were already about as close as one
could get away with.) If the experimenter was male, no effect. Moreover,
oxytocin caused males in relationships to spend less time looking at
pictures of attractive women. Importantly, oxytocin didn’t make men rate
these women as less attractive; they were simply less interested.29
Thus, oxytocin and vasopressin facilitate bonding between parent
and child and between couples.* Now for something truly charming that
evolution has cooked up recently. Sometime in the last fifty thousand
109