EMPATHY, SYMPATHY, AND MORAL
REASONING
B
y adolescence, people are typically pretty good at perspective
taking, seeing the world as someone else would. That’s usually
when you’ll first hear the likes of “Well, I still disagree, but I can see
how he feels that way, given his experience.”
Nonetheless, adolescents are not yet adults. Unlike adults, they are
still better at first- than third-person perspective taking (“How would you
feel in her situation?” versus “How does she feel in her situation?”).27
Adolescent moral judgments, while growing in sophistication, are still
not at adult levels. Adolescents have left behind children’s egalitarian
tendency to split resources evenly. Instead, adolescents mostly make
meritocratic decisions (with a smattering of utilitarian and libertarian
viewpoints thrown in); meritocratic thinking is more sophisticated than
egalitarian, since the latter is solely about outcomes, while the former
incorporates thinking about causes. Nonetheless, adolescents’
meritocratic thinking is less complex than adults’—for example,
adolescents are as adept as adults at understanding how individual
circumstances impact behavior, but not at understanding systemic
circumstances.
As adolescents mature, they increasingly distinguish between
intentional and accidental harm, viewing the former as worse.28 When
contemplating the latter, there is now less activation of three brain
regions related to pain processing, namely the amygdala, the insula, and
the premotor areas (the last reflecting the tendency to cringe when
hearing about pain being inflicted). Meanwhile, there is increasing
dlPFC and vmPFC activation when contemplating intentional harm. In
other words, it is a frontal task to appreciate the painfulness of
someone’s being harmed intentionally.
As adolescents mature, they also increasingly distinguish between
harm to people and harm to objects (with the former viewed as worse);
harm to people increasingly activates the amygdala, while the opposite
occurs for harm to objects. Interestingly, as adolescents age, there is less
165