These cultures emphasize rules of civility, courtesy, and hospitality.
Taking retribution is expected for affronts to the honor of one’s self,
family, or clan; failing to do so is shameful. These are cultures filled with
vendettas, revenge, and honor killings; cheeks aren’t turned. A classic
culture of honor is the American South, but as we’ll see in chapter 9,
such cultures occur worldwide and with certain ecological correlates. A
particularly lethal combo is when a culture of victimization—we were
wronged last week, last decade, last millennium—is coupled with a
culture of honor’s ethos of retribution.
Parenting in cultures of honor tends to be authoritarian.57 Kids are
aggressive, particularly following honor violations, and staunchly
endorse aggressive responses to scenarios of honor violation.
Class Differences
As noted, an infant baboon learns her place in the hierarchy from her
mother. A human child’s lessons about status are more complex—there
is implicit cuing, subtle language cues, the cognitive and emotional
weight of remembering the past (“When your grandparents emigrated
here they couldn’t even . . .”) and hoping about the future (“When you
grow up, you’re going to . . .”). Baboon mothers teach their young
appropriate behavioral context; human parents teach their young what to
bother dreaming about.
Class differences in parenting in Western countries resemble
parenting differences between Western countries and those in the
developing world. In the West a parent teaches and facilitates her child
exploring the world. In the toughest corners of the developing world,
little more is expected than the awesome task of keeping your child alive
and buffered from the menacing world.*
In Western cultures, class differences in parenting sort by Baumrind’s
typologies. In higher-SES strata, parenting tends to be authoritative or
permissive. In contrast, parenting in society’s lower-SES rungs is
typically authoritarian, reflecting two themes. One concerns protecting.
When are higher-SES parents authoritarian? When there is danger.
“Sweetie, I love that you question things, but if you run into the street
and I scream ‘Stop,’ you stop.” A lower-SES childhood is rife with
threat. The other theme is preparing the child for the tough world out
208