One, Shmuel, is raised as an Orthodox Jew in the Amazon; the other,
Wolfie, is raised as a Nazi in the Sahara. Reunite them as adults and see
if they do similar quirky things like, say, flushing the toilet before using
it. Flabbergastingly, one twin pair came close to that. They were born in
1933 in Trinidad to a German Catholic mother and a Jewish father; when
the boys were six months of age, the parents separated; the mother
returned to Germany with one son, and the other remained in Trinidad
with the father. The latter was raised there and in Israel as Jack Yufe, an
observant Jew whose first language was Yiddish. The other, Oskar Stohr,
was raised in Germany as a Hitler Youth zealot. Reunited and studied by
Bouchard, they warily got to know each other, discovering numerous
shared behavioral and personality traits including . . . flushing the toilet
before use. (As we’ll see, studies were more systematic than just
documenting bathroom quirks. The flushing detail, however, always
comes up in accounts of the pair.)
Behavior geneticists, wielding adoption and twin approaches,
generated scads of studies, filling specialized journals like Genes, Brain
and Behavior and Twin Research and Human Genetics. Collectively, the
research consistently showed that genetics plays a major role in a gamut
of domains of behavior, including IQ and its subcomponents (i.e., verbal
ability, and spatial ability),*15 schizophrenia, depression, bipolar
disorder, autism, attention-deficit disorder, compulsive gambling, and
alcoholism.
Nearly as strong genetic influences were shown for personality
measures related to extroversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness,
neuroticism, and openness to experience (known as the “Big Five”
personality traits).16 Likewise with genetic influences on degree of
religiosity, attitude toward authority, attitude toward homosexuality,* and
propensities toward cooperation and risk taking in games.
Other twin studies showed genetic influences on the likelihood of
risky sexual behavior and on people’s degree of attraction to secondary
sexual characteristics (e.g., musculature in men, breast size in women).17
Meanwhile, some social scientists report genetic influences on the
extent of political involvement and sophistication (independent of
political orientation); there are behavior genetics papers in the American
Journal of Political Science.18
Genes, genes, everywhere. Large genetic contributions have even
been uncovered for everything from the frequency with which teenagers
237