Where do these Westernized cultures of honor come from? Violence
between the Crips and the Bloods in LA is not readily traced to
combatants’ mind-sets from growing up herding yak. Nonetheless,
pastoralist roots have been suggested to explain the Southern culture of
honor. The theory as first propounded by historian David Hackett Fischer
in 1989: Early American regionalism arose from colonists in different
parts of America coming from different places.31 There were the
Pilgrims from East Anglia in New England. Quakers from North
Midlands going to Pennsylvania and Delaware. Southern English
indentured servants to Virginia. And the rest of the South?
Disproportionately herders from Scotland, Ireland, and northern
England.
Naturally, the idea has some problems. Pastoralists from the British
Isles mostly settled in the hill country of the South, whereas the honor
culture is stronger in the Southern lowlands. Others have suggested that
the Southern ethos of retributive violence was born from the white
Southern nightmare scenario of slave uprisings. But most historians have
found a lot of validity in Fischer’s idea.
Violence Turned Inward
Culture-of-honor violence is not just about outside threat—the camel
rustlers from the next tribe, the jerk at the roadhouse who came on to
some guy’s girlfriend. Instead it is equally defined by its role when honor
is threatened from within. Chapter 11 examines when norm violations by
members of your own group provoke cover-ups, excuses, or leniency,
and when they provoke severe public punishment. The latter is when
“you’ve dishonored us in front of everyone,” a culture-of-honor
specialty. Which raises the issue of honor killings.
What constitutes an honor killing? Someone does something
considered to tarnish the reputation of the family. A family member then
kills the despoiler, often publicly, thereby regaining face. Mind-boggling.
Some characteristics of honor killings:
While they have been widespread historically,
contemporary ones are mostly restricted to traditional
Muslim, Hindu, and Sikh communities.
288