INDIVIDUAL SELECTION
P
assing on lots of copies of one’s genes is accomplished most
directly by maximizing reproduction. This is summarized by the
aphorism “A chicken is an egg’s way of making another egg”—behavior
is just an epiphenomenon, a means of getting copies of genes into the
next generation.
Individual selection fares better than group selection in explaining
basic behaviors. A hyena bears down on some zebras. What would the
nearest one do if she’s a group selectionist? Stand there, sacrificing
herself for the group. In contrast, an individual selectionist zebra would
run like hell. Zebras run like hell. Or consider hyenas that have just
killed a zebra. Group selection mind-set—everyone calmly takes turns
eating. Individual selection—frenzied free-for-all. Which is what occurs.
But wait, says the group selectionist, wouldn’t the zebra species
benefit if it is the fastest animals who survive and pass on those fast-
running genes? Ditto for the group benefits of the fiercest hyena getting
the most food.
As more nuances of behavior are observed, clinging to group
selection requires increasingly tortuous arguments. But one single
observation devastates group selection.
In 1977 the Harvard primatologist Sarah Blaffer Hrdy documented
something remarkable—langur monkeys in the Mount Abu region of
India kill one another.7 People already knew that some male primates kill
one another, fighting for dominance—okay, makes sense, boys will be
boys. But that’s not what Hrdy reported; male langurs were killing
infants.
Once people believed her careful documentation, there was an easy
answer—since babies are cute and inhibit aggression, something
pathological must be happening.8 Maybe the Abu langur population
density was too high and everyone was starving, or male aggression was
overflowing, or infanticidal males were zombies. Something certifiably
abnormal.
Hrdy eliminated these explanations and showed a telling pattern to
the infanticide. Female langurs live in groups with a single resident
337