from the thick of the battlefield, from men whose lives were at risk while
they were reloading. In Gettysburg most deaths were caused by artillery,
not the infantry on the ground. In the heat of crazed battle, most men
would load, tend to the wounded, shout orders, run away, or wander in a
daze.
Similarly, in World War II only 15 to 20 percent of riflemen ever
fired their guns. The rest? Running messages, helping people load
ammunition, tending to buddies—but not aiming a rifle at someone
nearby and pulling a trigger.
Psychologists of warfare emphasize how, in the heat of battle, people
don’t shoot another human out of hatred or obedience, or even from
knowing that this enemy is trying to kill them. Instead it’s the
pseudokinship of bands of brothers—to protect your buddies, to not let
the guys next to you down. But outside those motivations, humans show
a strong natural aversion to killing at close range. The most resistance is
against hand-to-hand combat with a knife or bayonet. Next comes short-
range firing with a pistol, then long-range firing, all the way to the
easiest, which is bombs and artillery.
The resistance can be psychologically modified. It’s easier when you
aren’t targeting an identified individual—throwing a grenade into a
group rather than shooting at one person. Killing as an individual is
harder than in a group—while only that small subset of World War II
riflemen fired their weapons, nearly all weapons operated by a team
(e.g., machine guns) were fired. Responsibility is diluted, much as when
a firing squad would know that one of them had received a blank,
allowing every shooter to know that they might not have actually killed
someone.
Grossman’s premise is supported by something new and startling.
Since it morphed from “battle fatigue” or “shell shock” into a formal
psychiatric illness, combat PTSD has been framed as a result of the sheer
terror of being under attack, of someone trying to kill you and those
around you. As we’ve seen, it is an illness where fear conditioning is
overgeneralized and pathological, an amygdala grown large,
hyperreactive, and convinced that you are never safe. But consider drone
pilots—soldiers who sit in control rooms in the United States, directing
drones on the other side of the planet. They are not in danger. Yet their
rates of PTSD are just as high as those of soldiers actually “in” war.
644