no effect when right and wrong answers elicited different-colored
lights).33
So oxytocin elicits prosocial behavior, and oxytocin is released when
we experience prosocial behavior (being trusted in a game, receiving a
warm touch, and so on). In other words, a warm and fuzzy positive
feedback loop.34
Obviously, oxytocin and vasopressin are the grooviest hormones in
the universe.* Pour them into the water supply, and people will be more
charitable, trusting, and empathic. We’d be better parents and would
make love, not war (mostly platonic love, though, since people in
relationships would give wide berths to everyone else). Best of all, we’d
buy all sorts of useless crap, trusting the promotional banners in stores
once oxytocin starts spraying out of the ventilation system.
Okay, time to settle down a bit.
Prosociality Versus Sociality
Are oxytocin and vasopressin about prosociality or social
competence? Do these hormones make us see happy faces everywhere or
become more interested in gathering accurate social information about
faces? The latter isn’t necessarily prosocial; after all, accurate
information about someone’s emotions makes them easier to manipulate.
The Groovy Neuropeptide School supports the idea of ubiquitous
prosociality.35 But the neuropeptides also foster social interest and
competence. They make people look at eyes longer, increasing accuracy
in reading emotions. Moreover, oxytocin enhances activity in the
temporoparietal juncture (that region involved in Theory of Mind) when
people do a social-recognition task. The hormone increases the accuracy
of assessments of other people’s thoughts, with a gender twist—women
improve at detecting kinship relations, while men improve at detecting
dominance relations. In addition, oxytocin increases accuracy in
remembering faces and their emotional expressions, and people with the
“sensitive parenting” oxytocin receptor gene variant are particularly
adept at assessing emotions. Similarly, the hormones facilitate rodents’
learning of an individual’s smell, but not nonsocial odors.
Neuroimaging research shows that these neuropeptides are about
social competence, as well as prosociality.36 For example, variants of a
111