in a “cognition” bucket, ignoring the impact of social and emotional
factors.
One example to be discussed in chapter 12 concerns preverbal
infants, who sure don’t grasp transitivity (if A > B, and B > C, then A >
C). Show a violation of transitivity in interactions between shapes on a
screen (shape A should knock over shape C, but the opposite occurs),
and the kid is unbothered, doesn’t look for long. But personify the shapes
with eyes and a mouth, and now heart rate increases, the kid looks longer
—“Whoa, character C is supposed to move out of character A’s way,
not the reverse.” Humans understand logical operations between
individuals earlier than between objects.10
Social and motivational state can shift cognitive stage as well.
Rudiments of ToM are more demonstrable in chimps who are interacting
with another chimp (versus a human) and if there is something
motivating—food—involved.*11
Emotion and affect can alter cognitive stage in remarkably local
ways. I saw a wonderful example of this when my daughter displayed
both ToM and failure of ToM in the same breath. She had changed
preschools and was visiting her old class. She told everyone about life in
her new school: “Then, after lunch, we play on the swings. There are
swings at my new school. And then, after that, we go inside and Carolee
reads us a story. Then, after that . . .” ToM: “play on the swings”—wait,
they don’t know that my school has swings; I need to tell them. Failure
of ToM: “Carolee reads us a story.” Carolee, the teacher at her new
school. The same logic should apply—tell them who Carolee is. But
because Carolee was the most wonderful teacher alive, ToM failed.
Afterward I asked her, “Hey, why didn’t you tell everyone that Carolee is
your teacher?” “Oh, everyone knows Carolee.” How could everyone
not?
Feeling Someone Else’s Pain
ToM leads to a next step—people can have different feelings than
me, including pained ones.12 This realization is not sufficient for
empathy. After all, sociopaths, who pathologically lack empathy, use
superb ToM to stay three manipulative, remorseless steps ahead of
everyone. Nor is this realization strictly necessary for empathy, as kids
179