* I once got pulled into this silly, fun venture. There is a diner called Buck’s near Stanford that is famed as a place where
venture capitalists come to make deals over power breakfasts; apparently, legendary Silicon Valley companies have been born
at its tables. A Silicon Valley newspaper persuaded me, as a primatologist, to tag along with a reporter and do ethological
observations of venture capitalist dominance interactions in their natural habitat at Buck’s. We monitored one table with two
opposing pairs of business guys negotiating something. Each side had a tanned, fit alpha male, presumably the boss; each
side had a subaltern toady, weighed down with folders and spreadsheets. The toadies interacted with each other constantly,
pushing papers at each other, jabbing fingers in the air, grimacing. The two bosses floated above it, their chairs angled to
conspicuously ignore each other, their cell phones miraculously ringing each time the other side attempted to talk to them—
they’d wave an imperious, dismissive hand at the opponent and take the call. Occasionally, the toadie would ask his boss
something privately and, with a display of Mandarin minimalism, the boss would briefly nod his head and change the course
of history. Negotiations concluded, seemingly to everyone’s satisfaction, hands were shaken, breakfast was left ritualistically
untouched, and everyone departed. The reporter and I scrambled over to the window to observe them in the parking lot.
Adversarial interactions over with, the Us/Them-ing shifted—the subalterns scurried off to their sensible little Priuses while
the two Masters of the Universe remained chatting, each retrieving a tennis racket from his SUV, amiably comparing them,
each trying out a swing or two with the other’s. At that moment the face of each one’s faithful toady probably wouldn’t have
even activated the fusiform face area in his boss; instead, the most important Us concerned the enjoyable presence of
someone else who could commiserate about the hassles of alimony for a third ex-wife.
1111