to the other guy. None of that prosociality is there, a picture counter to
what we saw in chapter 9.
I think an explanation is that these economic games tap into a very
specific and artificial type of prosociality. We tend to think of market
interactions as being the epitome of complexity—finding a literal
common currency for the array of human needs and desires in the form
of this abstraction called money. But at their core, market interactions
represent an impoverishment of human reciprocity. In its natural form,
human reciprocity is a triumph of comfortably and intuitively doing
long-term math with apples and oranges—this guy over here is a
superstar hunter; that other guy isn’t in his league but has your back if
there’s a lion around; meanwhile, she’s amazing at finding the best
mongongo nuts, that older woman knows all about medicinal herbs, and
that geeky guy remembers the best stories. We know where one another
live, the debit columns even out over time, and if someone is really
abusing the system, we’ll get around to collectively dealing with them.
In contrast, at its core, a cash-economy market interaction strips it all
down to “I give you this now, so you give me that now”—myopic
present-tense interactions whose obligations of reciprocity must be
balanced immediately. People in small-scale societies are relatively new
to functioning this way. It’s not the case that small-scale cultures that are
growing big and market reliant are newly schooled in how to be fair.
Instead they’re newly schooled in how to be fair in the artificial
circumstances modeled by something like the Ultimatum Game.
HONOR AND REVENGE
Another realm of cross-cultural differences in moral systems
concerns what constitutes appropriate response to personal affronts. This
harks back to chapter 9’s cultures of honor, from Maasai tribesmen to
traditional American Southerners. As we saw, such cultures have
historical links to monotheism, warrior age groups, and pastoralism.
To recap, such cultures typically see an unanswered challenge to
honor as the start of a disastrous slippery slope, rooted in the intrinsic
vulnerability of pastoralism—while no one can raid farmers and steal all
their crops, someone can rustle a herd overnight—and if this sum’a bitch
gets away with insulting my family, he’ll be coming for my cattle next.
These are cultures that place a high moral emphasis on revenge, and
revenge at least in kind—after all, an eye for an eye was probably the
500