child fall into a river, you’d be more likely to jump in and sacrifice the
suit than to send $500 to that friend making the phone call. Someone
being right there, in the flesh, in front of our eyes is a strong implicit
prime that they are an Us.
Moral context dependency can also revolve around language, as
noted in chapter 3.22 Recall, for example, people using different rules
about the morality of cooperation if you call the same economic game
the “Wall Street game” or the “community game.” Framing an
experimental drug as having a “5 percent mortality rate” versus a “95
percent survival rate” produces different decisions about the ethics of
using it.
Framing also taps into the themes of people having multiple
identities, belonging to multiple Us groups and hierarchies. This was
shown in a hugely interesting 2014 Nature paper by Alain Cohn and
colleagues at the University of Zurich.23 Subjects, who worked for an
(unnamed) international bank, played a coin-toss game with financial
rewards for guessing outcomes correctly. Crucially, the game’s design
made it possible for subjects to cheat at various points (and for the
investigators to detect the cheating).
In one version subjects first completed a questionnaire filled with
mundane questions about their everyday lives (e.g., “How many hours of
television do you watch each week?”). This produced a low, baseline
level of cheating.
Then, in the experimental version, the questionnaire was about their
bank job. Questions like these primed the subjects to implicitly think
more about banking (e.g., they became more likely in a word task to
complete “__oker” with “broker” than with “smoker”).
So subjects were thinking about their banking identity. And when
they did, rates of cheating rose 20 percent. Priming people in other
professions (e.g., manufacturing) to think about their jobs, or about the
banking world, didn’t increase cheating. These bankers carried in their
heads two different sets of ethical rules concerning cheating (banking
and nonbanking), and unconscious cuing brought one or the other to the
forefront.* Know thyself. Especially in differing contexts.
“But This Circumstance Is Different”
492