Victims are usually young women.
Their most common crimes? Refusing an arranged
marriage. Seeking to divorce an abusive spouse and/or a
spouse to whom they were forcibly married as a child.
Seeking education. Resisting constraining religious
orthodoxy, such as covering their head. Marrying, living
with, dating, interacting with, or speaking to an
unapproved male. Infidelity. Religious conversion. In
other words, a woman resisting being the property of her
male relatives. And also, stunningly, staggeringly, a
frequent cause of honor killings is being raped.
In the rare instances of men being subject to honor
killings, the typical cause is homosexuality.
There has been debate as to whether honor killings are “just”
domestic violence, and whether morbid Western fascination with them
reflects anti-Muslim bias;32 if some Baptist guy in Alabama murders his
wife because she wants a divorce, no one frames it as a “Christian honor
killing” reflecting deep religious barbarity. But honor killings typically
differ from garden-variety domestic violence in several ways: (a) The
latter is usually committed by a male partner; the former are usually
committed by male blood relatives, often with the approval of and
facilitation by female relatives. (b) The former is rarely an act of
spontaneous passion but instead is often planned with the approval of
family members. (c) Honor killings are often rationalized on religious
grounds, presented without remorse, and approved by religious leaders.
(d) Honor killings are carried out openly—after all, how else can
“honor” be regained for the family?—and the chosen perpetrator is often
an underage relative (e.g., a younger brother), to minimize the extent of
sentencing for the act.
By some pretty meaningful criteria, this is not “just” domestic
violence. According to estimates by the UN and advocacy groups, five to
twenty thousand honor killings occur annually. And they are not
restricted to far-off, alien lands. Instead they occur throughout the West,
where patriarchs expect their daughters to be untouched by the world
they moved them to, where a daughter’s successful assimilation into this
world proclaims the irrelevance of that patriarch.
289