So, Hobbes or Rousseau? Well, a mixture of the two, I say unhelpfully.
This lengthy section makes clear that you have to make some careful
distinctions: (a) HGs versus other traditional ways of making a living;
(b) nomadic HGs versus sedentary ones; (c) data sets that canvass an
entire literature versus those that concentrate on extreme examples; (d)
members of traditional societies killing one another versus members
being killed by gun-toting, land-grabbing outsiders; (e) chimps as our
cousins versus chimps erroneously viewed as our ancestors; (f) chimps
as our closest ancestors versus chimps and bonobos as our closest
ancestors; (g) warfare versus homicide, where lots of the former can
decrease the latter in the name of in-group cooperation; (h) contemporary
HGs living in stable, resource-filled habitats with minimal interactions
with the outside world versus contemporary HGs pushed into marginal
habitats and interacting with non-HGs. Once you’ve done that, I think a
pretty clear answer emerges. The HGs who peopled earth for hundreds of
thousands of years were probably no angels, being perfectly capable of
murder. However, “war”—both in the sense that haunts our modern
world and in the stripped-down sense that haunted our ancestors—seems
to have been rare until most humans abandoned the nomadic HG
lifestyle. Our history as a species has not been soaked in escalated
conflict. And ironically Keeley tacitly concludes the same—he estimates
that 90 to 95 percent of societies engage in war. And whom does he note
as the exceptions? Nomadic HGs.
Which brings us to agriculture. I won’t pull any punches—I think
that its invention was one of the all-time human blunders, up there with,
say, the New Coke debacle and the Edsel. Agriculture makes people
dependent on a few domesticated crops and animals instead of hundreds
of wild food sources, creating vulnerability to droughts and blights and
zoonotic diseases. Agriculture makes for sedentary living, leading
humans to do something that no primate with a concern for hygiene and
public health would ever do, namely living in close proximity to their
feces. Agriculture makes for surplus and thus almost inevitably the
unequal distribution of surplus, generating socioeconomic status
differences that dwarf anything that other primates cook up with their
hierarchies. And from there it’s just a hop, skip, and a jump until we’ve
got Mr. McGregor persecuting Peter Rabbit and people incessantly
singing “Oklahoma.”
326