certain genes on or off, alter the metabolisms of cells, cause them to
grow or atrophy, to divide or to shrivel up and die. Testosterone, for
example, increases muscle mass, and progesterone causes the
proliferation of cells in the uterus, causing it to thicken during the luteal
phase. Conversely, thyroid hormone kills cells in a tadpole’s tail as the
animal is metamorphosing into a frog, and a class of stress hormones can
kill cells in the immune system (helping to explain how stress makes us
vulnerable to getting a cold). Hormones are extremely versatile.
Most hormones are part of a “neuroendocrine axis.” Recall from
chapter 2 how all roads in the limbic system lead to the hypothalamus,
with its pivotal role in regulating the autonomic nervous system and
hormonal systems. Here’s where that second part comes in. Neurons in
the hypothalamus secrete a particular hormone that travels in a tiny, local
circulatory system connecting to the pituitary, just below the base of the
brain. There that hormone stimulates the secretion of a particular
pituitary hormone, which enters the general circulation and stimulates
the secretion of a third hormone from some peripheral gland. Here’s an
example involving my three favorite hormones: during stress,
hypothalamic neurons secrete CRH (corticotropin-releasing hormone),
which stimulates pituitary cells to secrete ACTH (adrenocorticotropic
hormone). Once in the general circulation, ACTH gets to the adrenal
glands, where it stimulates secretion of steroid stress hormones called
glucocorticoids (with the human version being cortisol, aka
hydrocortisone). Other hormones (e.g., estrogen, progesterone,
testosterone, and thyroid hormone) are released from peripheral glands
as the final step of their own “hypothalamic/pituitary/peripheral gland
axis.”* As a wonderful complication, the secretion of each particular
pituitary hormone is often not under the control of only a single
hypothalamic releasing hormone. Instead there are multiple types of
hormones serving that function, and other hypothalamic hormones that
inhibit that particular pituitary hormone’s release. For example, an array
of hypothalamic hormones in addition to CRH regulates the release of
ACTH, where different types of stressors produce different combinations
of those hypothalamic hormones.
Not all hormones are regulated in this brain/pituitary/peripheral gland
manner. In some cases there’s a brain/pituitary two-step, where the
pituitary hormone exerts effects throughout the body; growth hormone
generally fits this pattern. In other systems the brain sends projections
708