In contrast, those from collectivist cultures show more social
comprehension; some reports suggest that they are better at Theory of
Mind tasks, more accurate in understanding someone else’s perspective
—with “perspective” ranging from the other person’s abstract thoughts
to how objects appear from where she is sitting. There is more blame of
the group when someone violates a norm due to peer pressure, and a
greater tendency to give situational explanations for behavior.
Competitive drive is about not falling behind everyone else. And when
drawing sociograms, the circle representing “yourself” is far from the
center, and far from the biggest.
Naturally, these cultural differences have biological correlates. For
example, subjects from individualist cultures strongly activate the
(emotional) mPFC when looking at a picture of themselves, compared to
looking at a picture of a relative or friend; in contrast, the activation is
far less for East Asian subjects.* Another example is a favorite
demonstration of mine of cross-cultural differences in psychological
stress—when asked in free recall, Americans are more likely than East
Asians to remember times in which they influenced someone;
conversely, East Asians are more likely to remember times when
someone influenced them. Force Americans to talk at length about a time
someone influenced them, or force East Asians to detail their influencing
someone, and both secrete glucocorticoids from the stressfulness of
having to recount this discomfiting event. And work by my Stanford
colleagues and friends Jeanne Tsai and Brian Knutson shows that
mesolimbic dopamine systems activate in European Americans when
looking at excited facial expressions; in Chinese, when looking at calm
expressions.
As we will see in chapter 13, these cultural differences produce
different moral systems. In the most traditional of collectivist societies,
conformity and morality are virtually synonymous and norm
enforcement is more about shame (“What will people think if I did
that?”) than guilt (“How could I live with myself?”). Collectivist cultures
foster more utilitarian and consequentialist moral stances (for example, a
greater willingness for an innocent person to be jailed in order to prevent
a riot). The tremendous collectivist emphasis on the group produces a
greater degree of in-group bias than among individualist culture
members. In one study, for example, Korean and European American
subjects observed pictures of either in- or out-group members in pain.
274