The studies tend to show activation of the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) as well. As introduced in chapter 2, the ACC responds to
circumstances of conflicting choices. This occurs for conflict in an
emotional sense, as well as in a cognitive sense (e.g., having to choose
between two answers when both seem to work). In the lying studies the
ACC isn’t activating because of moral conflict about lying, since
subjects were instructed to lie. Instead, it’s monitoring the conflict
between reality and what you’ve been instructed to report, and this gums
up the works slightly; people show minutely longer response times
during lying trials than during honest ones.
This delay is useful in polygraph tests (i.e., lie detectors). In the
classic form, the test detected arousal of the sympathetic nervous system,
indicating that someone was lying and anxious about not getting caught.
The trouble is that you’d get the same anxious arousal if you’re telling
the truth but your life’s over if that fallible machine says otherwise.
Moreover, sociopaths are undetectable, since they don’t get anxiously
aroused when lying. Plus subjects can take countermeasures to
manipulate their sympathetic nervous system. As a result, this use of
polygraphs is no longer admissible in courts. Contemporary polygraph
techniques instead home in on that slight delay, on the physiological
indices of that ACC conflict—not the moral one, since some miscreant
may have no moral misgivings, but the cognitive conflict—“Yeah, I
robbed the store, but no, wait, I have to say that I didn’t.” Unless you
thoroughly believe your lie, there’s likely to be that slight delay,
reflecting the ACC-ish cognitive conflict between reality and your claim.
Thus, activation of the ACC, dlPFC, and nearby frontal regions is
associated with lying on command.41 At this point we have our usual
issue of causality—is activation of, say, the dlPFC a cause, a
consequence, or a mere correlate of lying? To answer this, transcranial
direct-current stimulation has been used to inactivate the dlPFC in people
during instructed-lying tasks. Result? Subjects were slower and less
successful in lying—implying a causal role for the dlPFC. And to remind
us of how complicated this issue is, people with damage to the dlPFC are
less likely to take honesty into account when honesty and self-interest
are pitted against each other in an economic game. So this most
eggheady, cognitive part of the PFC is central to both resisting lying and,
once having decided to lie, doing it well.
515