They’re missing the important stuff. A key rebuttal is to remind
everyone that paleontologists study things that are fossilized. Bones,
shells, bugs in amber. Not organs—brains, pituitaries, ovaries. Not cells
—neurons, endocrine cells, eggs, sperm. Not molecules—
neurotransmitters, hormones, enzymes. In other words, none of the
interesting stuff. Those punctuated equilibrium nudniks spend their
careers measuring zillions of snail shells and, based on that, say we’re
wrong about the evolution of behavior?
This opens the way for some compromise. Maybe the hominin pelvis
did indeed evolve in a punctuated manner, with long periods of stasis and
bursts of rapid change. And maybe the pituitary’s evolution was
punctuated as well, but with punctuations at different times. And maybe
steroid hormone receptors and the organization of frontocortical neurons
and the inventions of oxytocin and vasopressin all evolved that way also,
but each undergoing punctuated change at a different time. Overlap and
average these punctuated patterns, and it will be gradualist. This only
gets you so far, though, since it assumes the occurrence of numerous
evolutionary bottlenecks.
Where’s the molecular biology? One of the strongest gradualist
retorts was a molecular one. Micromutation, consisting of point,
insertion, and deletion mutations that subtly change the function of
preexisting proteins, is all about gradualism. But what mechanisms of
molecular evolution explain rapid, dramatic change and long periods of
stasis?
As we saw in chapter 8, recent decades have provided many possible
molecular mechanisms for rapid change. This is the world of
macromutations: (a) traditional point, insertion, and deletion mutations in
genes whose proteins have amplifying network effects (transcription
factors, splicing enzymes, transposes) in an exon expressed in multiple
proteins in genes for enzymes involved in epigenetics; (b) traditional
mutations in promoters, transforming the when/where/how-much of gene
expression (remember that promoter change that makes polygamous
voles monogamous); (c) untraditional mutations such as the duplication
or deletion of entire genes. All means for big, rapid changes.
But what about a molecular mechanism for the stasis? Plunk a
random mutation into a transcription-factor gene, thereby creating a new
cluster of genes never before expressed simultaneously. What are the
odds that it won’t be a disaster? Randomly mutate a gene for an enzyme
379