c. The accumbens projects to regions associated with
movement.
d. Naturally, most areas getting projections from the
tegmentum and/or accumbens project back to them.
Most interesting will be the projections from the
amygdala and PFC.
Reward
As a first pass, the dopaminergic system is about reward—various
pleasurable stimuli activate tegmental neurons, triggering their release of
dopamine.77 Some supporting evidence: (a) drugs like cocaine, heroin,
and alcohol release dopamine in the accumbens; (b) if tegmental release
of dopamine is blocked, previously rewarding stimuli become aversive;
(c) chronic stress or pain depletes dopamine and decreases the sensitivity
of dopamine neurons to stimulation, producing the defining symptom of
depression—“anhedonia,” the inability to feel pleasure.
Some rewards, such as sex, release dopamine in every species
examined.78 For humans, just thinking about sex suffices.*79 Food
evokes dopamine release in hungry individuals of all species, with an
added twist in humans. Show a picture of a milkshake to someone after
they’ve consumed one, and there’s rarely dopaminergic activation—
there’s satiation. But with subjects who have been dieting, there’s further
activation. If you’re working to restrict your food intake, a milkshake
just makes you want another one.
The mesolimbic dopamine system also responds to pleasurable
aesthetics.80 In one study people listened to new music; the more
accumbens activation, the more likely subjects were to buy the music
afterward. And then there is dopaminergic activation for artificial
cultural inventions—for example, when typical males look at pictures of
sports cars.
Patterns of dopamine release are most interesting when concerning
social interactions.81 Some findings are downright heartwarming. In one
study a subject would play an economic game with someone, where a
player is rewarded under two circumstances: (a) if both players
cooperate, each receives a moderate reward, and (b) stabbing the other
person in the back gets the subject a big reward, while the other person
68