individuals with stroke damage in the frontal cortex—for example,
sexually assaultive behavior in an octogenarian.
There’s another circumstance where the frontal cortex is
hypofunctional, producing similar behavioral manifestations—
hypersexuality, outbursts of emotion, flamboyantly illogical acts.54 What
disease is this? It isn’t. You’re dreaming. During REM sleep, when
dreaming occurs, the frontal cortex goes off-line, and dream scriptwriters
run wild. Moreover, if the frontal cortex is stimulated while people are
dreaming, the dreams become less dreamlike, with more self-awareness.
And there’s another nonpathological circumstance where the PFC
silences, producing emotional tsunamis: during orgasm.
One last realm of frontal damage. Adrian Raine of the University of
Pennsylvania and Kent Kiehl of the University of New Mexico report
that criminal psychopaths have decreased activity in the frontal cortex
and less coupling of the PFC to other brain regions (compared with
nonpsychopathic criminals and noncriminal controls). Moreover, a
shockingly large percentage of people incarcerated for violent crimes
have a history of concussive trauma to the frontal cortex.55 More to come
in chapter 16.
The Obligatory Declaration of the Falseness of the
Dichotomy Between Cognition and Emotion
The PFC consists of various parts, subparts, and sub-subparts,
enough to keep neuroanatomists off the dole. Two regions are crucial.
First there is the dorsal part of the PFC, especially the dorsolateral PFC
(dlPFC)—don’t worry about “dorsal” or “dorsolateral”; it’s just jargon.*
The dlPFC is the decider of deciders, the most rational, cognitive,
utilitarian, unsentimental part of the PFC. It’s the most recently evolved
part of the PFC and the last part to fully mature. It mostly hears from and
talks to other cortical regions.
In contrast to the dlPFC, there’s the ventral part of the PFC,
particularly the ventromedial PFC (vmPFC). This is the frontocortical
region that the visionary neuroanatomist Nauta made an honorary
member of the limbic system because of its interconnections with it.
Logically, the vmPFC is all about the impact of emotion on decision
57