too young for ToM show rudiments of feeling someone else’s pain—a
toddler will try to comfort someone feigning crying, offering them her
pacifier (and the empathy is rudimentary in that the toddler can’t imagine
someone being comforted by different things than she is).
Yes, very rudimentary. Maybe the toddler feels profound empathy. Or
maybe she’s just distressed by the crying and is self-interestedly trying to
quiet the adult. The childhood capacity for empathy progresses from
feeling someone’s pain because you are them, to feeling for the other
person, to feeling as them.
The neurobiology of kid empathy makes sense. As introduced in
chapter 2, in adults the anterior cingulate cortex activates when they see
someone hurt. Ditto for the amygdala and insula, especially in instances
of intentional harm—there is anger and disgust. PFC regions including
the (emotional) vmPFC are on board. Observing physical pain (e.g., a
finger being poked with a needle) produces a concrete, vicarious pattern:
there is activation of the periaqueductal gray (PAG), a region central to
your own pain perception, in parts of the sensory cortex receiving
sensation from your own fingers, and in motor neurons that command
your own fingers to move.* You clench your fingers.
Work by Jean Decety of the University of Chicago shows that when
seven-year-olds watch someone in pain, activation is greatest in the more
concrete regions—the PAG and the sensory and motor cortices—with
PAG activity coupled to the minimal vmPFC activation there is. In older
kids the vmPFC is coupled to increasingly activated limbic structures.13
And by adolescence the stronger vmPFC activation is coupled to ToM
regions. What’s happening? Empathy is shifting from the concrete world
of “Her finger must hurt, I’m suddenly conscious of my own finger” to
ToM-ish focusing on the pokee’s emotions and experience.
Young kids’ empathy doesn’t distinguish between intentional and
unintentional harm or between harm to a person and to an object. Those
distinctions emerge with age, around the time when the PAG part of
empathic responses lessens and there is more engagement of the vmPFC
and ToM regions; moreover, intentional harm now activates the
amygdala and insula—anger and disgust at the perpetrator.* This is also
when kids first distinguish between self- and other-inflicted pain.
More sophistication—by around age seven, kids are expressing their
empathy. By ages ten through twelve, empathy is more generalized and
abstracted—empathy for “poor people,” rather than one individual
180