Neurotransmitters
Sitting inside each axon terminal, tethered to the membrane, are little
balloons called vesicles, filled with many copies of a chemical
messenger. Along comes the action potential that initiated miles away in
that neuron’s axon hillock. It sweeps over the terminal and triggers the
release of those chemical messengers into the synapse. Which they float
across, reaching the dendritic spine on the other side, where they excite
the neuron. These chemical messengers are called neurotransmitters.
How do neurotransmitters, released from the “presynaptic” side of
the synapse, cause excitation in the “postsynaptic” dendritic spine?
Sitting on the membrane of the spine are receptors for the
neurotransmitter. Time to introduce one of the great clichés of biology.
The neurotransmitter molecule has a distinctive shape (with each copy of
the molecule having the same). The receptor has a binding pocket of a
distinctive shape that is perfectly complementary to the shape of the
neurotransmitter. And thus the neurotransmitter—cliché time—fits into
the receptor like a key into a lock. No other molecule fits snugly into that
receptor; the neurotransmitter molecule won’t fit snugly into any other
type of receptor. Neurotransmitter binds to receptor, which triggers those
channels to open, and the currents of ionic excitation begin in the
dendritic spine.
This describes “transsynaptic” communication with
neurotransmitters. Except for one detail: what happens to the
neurotransmitter molecules after they bind to the receptors? They don’t
bind forever—remember that action potentials occur on the order of a
millisecond. Instead they float off the receptors, at which point the
neurotransmitters have to be cleaned up. This occurs in one of two ways.
First, for the ecologically minded synapse, there are “reuptake pumps” in
the membrane of the axon terminal. They take up the neurotransmitters
and recycle them, putting them back into those secretory vesicles to be
used again.* The second option is for the neurotransmitter to be
degraded in the synapse by an enzyme, with the breakdown products
flushed out to sea (i.e., the extracellular environment, and from there on
to the cerebrospinal fluid, the bloodstream, and eventually the bladder).
689