THE VIEW FROM THE TOP, THE VIEW
FROM THE BOTTOM
Detecting Rank
Much as with our ability to detect Thems, we’re intensely interested
in and adept at spotting rank differences. For example, forty milliseconds
is all we need to reliably distinguish between a dominant face (with
direct gaze) and a subordinate one (with averted gaze and lowered
eyebrows). Status is also signaled in the body, albeit to a less accurate
extent—dominance with an exposed torso with arms wide open,
subordination with arms sheltering a bent torso, intent on invisibility.
Again, we recognize those cues at automatic speeds.9
Human infants also recognize status differences, as shown in a truly
clever study. Show an infant a computer screen displaying a big square
and little square; each has eyes and a mouth.10 The two squares are at
opposite ends of the screen and repeatedly move to the other side,
passing each other in the process. Then show a version where the two
bump into each other—conflict. The squares bump repeatedly until one
of them “gives in” by lying down, letting the other one pass. Toddlers
look at the interaction longer when it’s the big square that gives in, rather
than the little one. The first scenario is more interesting because it
violates expectations—“Hey, I thought big squares dominated little
squares.” Just like monkeys and corvids.
But wait, this may just reflect folk physics, not attunement to
hierarchy—big things knock over little things, not the other way around.
This confound was eliminated. First, the adversarial squares were not
touching when one gave in. Second, the subordinating one would fall in
the opposite direction from that predicted by physics—rather than being
knocked backward, it prostrates itself before the alpha square.
Along with this expertise comes intense interest in hierarchy—as
emphasized in chapter 9, gossip is mostly about the status of status: Are
there any fallen mighty? Have the meek inherited anything lately?
Regardless of which square wins, infants look longer at the conflict
situation than when the squares peacefully glide past each other.
434