being in a group means that someone else’s behaviors can make you look
bad.*24
This raises a larger issue, namely our sense of obligation and loyalty
to Us as a whole. At one extreme it can be contractual. This can be
literal, with professional athletes in team sports. It is expected that when
jocks sign contracts, they will play their hardest, putting the team’s
fortune above showboating. But the obligations are finite—they’re not
expected to sacrifice their lives for their team. And when athletes are
traded, they don’t serve as a fifth column, throwing games in their new
uniform to benefit their old team. The core of such a contractual
relationship is the fungibility of both employer and employee.
At the other extreme, of course, are Us memberships that are not
fungible and transcend negotiation. People aren’t traded from the Shiites
to the Sunnis, or from the Iraqi Kurds to the Sami herders in Finland. It
would be a rare Kurd who would want to be Sami, and his ancestors
would likely turn over in their graves when he nuzzled his first reindeer.
Converts are often subject to ferocious retribution by those they left—
consider Meriam Ibrahim, sentenced to death in Sudan in 2014 for
converting to Christianity—and suspicion from those they’ve joined.
With the sense of one’s lot being permanent come distinctive elements of
Us-ness. You don’t sign a faith-based baseball contract with vague
promises of a salary. But Us-ness based on sacred values, with wholes
bigger than sums of parts, where unenforceable obligations stretch across
generations, millennia, even into afterlives, where it’s Us, right or wrong,
is the essence of faith-based relationships.
Naturally, things are more complicated. Sometimes an athlete
choosing to switch teams is viewed as betraying a sacred trust. Consider
the perceived treachery when LeBron James chose to leave the Cavaliers
of his hometown, Cleveland, and the perception of his choice to return as
akin to the Second Coming. At the other extreme of group membership,
people do convert, emigrate, assimilate, and, especially in the United
States, wind up a pretty atypical Us—consider ex-Governor Bobby
Jindal of Louisiana, with his rich Southern accent and Christian faith,
born Piyush Jindal to Hindu immigrant parents from India. And consider
the complexities in, to use a horrible phrase, the unidirectionality of
fungibility—Muslim fundamentalists who would execute Meriam
Ibrahim while advocating forced conversions to Islam at the point of a
sword.
399