CONCLUSIONS
E
pigenetic environmental effects on the developing brain are hugely
exciting. Nonetheless, curbing of enthusiasm is needed. Findings
have been overinterpreted, and as more researchers flock to the subject,
the quality of studies has declined. Moreover, there is the temptation to
conclude that epigenetics explains “everything,” whatever that might be;
most effects of childhood experience on adult outcomes probably don’t
involve epigenetics and (stay tuned) most epigenetic changes are
transient. Particularly strong criticisms come from molecular geneticists
rather than behavioral scientists (who generally embrace the topic); some
of the negativity from the former, I suspect, is fueled by the indignity of
having to incorporate the likes of rat mothers licking their pups into their
beautiful world of gene regulation.
But the excitement should be restrained on a deeper level, one
relevant to the entire chapter. Stimulating environments, harsh parents,
good neighborhoods, uninspiring teachers, optimal diets—all alter genes
in the brain. Wow. And not that long ago the revolution was about how
environment and experience change the excitability of synapses, their
number, neuronal circuits, even the number of neurons. Whoa. And
earlier the revolution was about how environment and experience can
change the sizes of different parts of the brain. Amazing.
But none of this is truly amazing. Because things must work these
ways. While little in childhood determines an adult behavior, virtually
everything in childhood changes propensities toward some adult
behavior. Freud, Bowlby, Harlow, Meaney, from their differing
perspectives, all make the same fundamental and once-revolutionary
point: childhood matters. All that the likes of growth factors, on/off
switches, and rates of myelination do is provide insights into the innards
of that fact.
Such insight is plenty useful. It shows the steps linking childhood
point A to adult point Z. It shows how parents can produce offspring
whose behaviors resemble their own. It identifies Achilles’ heels that
explain how childhood adversity can make for damaged and damaging
223