groups, and these neuropeptides can make people crappier to outsiders—
more xenophobic and preemptively aggressive.
Chapter 4 also touched on oxytocin and vasopressin genetics,
showing that individuals with genetic variants that result in higher levels
of either the hormones or their receptors tend toward more stable
monogamous relationships, more actively engaged parenting, better skill
at perspective taking, more empathy, and stronger fusiform cortex
responses to faces. These are fairly consistent effects of moderate
magnitude.
Meanwhile, there are studies showing that one oxytocin receptor
gene variant is associated with extreme aggression in kids, as well as a
callous, unemotional style that foreshadows adult psychopathy.54
Moreover, another variant is associated with social disconnection in kids
and unstable adult relationships. But unfortunately these findings are
uninterpretable because no one knows if these variants produce more,
less, or the usual amount of oxytocin signaling.
Of course, there are cool gene/environment interactions. For
example, having a particular oxytocin receptor gene variant predicts less
sensitive mothering—but only when coupled with childhood adversity.
Another variant is associated with aggression—but only when people
have been drinking. Yet another variant is associated with greater
seeking of emotional support during times of stress—among Americans
(including first generation Korean Americans) but not Koreans (stay
tuned for more in the next chapter).
Genes Related to Steroid Hormones
We start with testosterone. The hormone is not a protein (none of the
steroid hormones are), meaning there isn’t a testosterone gene. However,
there are genes for the enzymes that construct testosterone, for the
enzyme that converts it to estrogen, and for the testosterone (androgen)
receptor. The most work has focused on the gene for the receptor, which
comes in variants that differ in their responsiveness to testosterone.*
Intriguingly, a few studies have shown that among criminals, having
the more potent variant is associated with violent crimes.55 A related
finding concerns sex differences in structure of the cortex, and
adolescent boys with the more potent variant show more dramatic
258