to make that distinction is mighty useful, as it prompts you to run away
from, rather than toward, something intent on eating you.
Language pries apart a message from its meaning, and as our
ancestors improved at this separation, advantages accrued.5 We became
capable of representing past and future emotions, as well as messages
unrelated to emotion. We evolved great expertise at separating message
from reality, which, as we’ve seen, requires the frontal cortex to regulate
the nuances of face, body, and voice: lying. This capacity creates
complexities that no one else—from slime mold to chimp—deals with in
life’s Prisoner’s Dilemmas.
The height of the symbolic features of language is our use of
metaphor. And this is not just flourish metaphors, when we declare that
life is a bowl of cherries. Metaphors are everywhere in language—we
may literally and physically be “in” a room, but we are only
metaphorically inside something when we are “in” a good mood, “in”
cahoots with someone, “in” luck, a funk, a groove,* or love. We are only
metaphorically standing under something when we “understand” it.*6
The renowned cognitive linguist George Lakoff of UC Berkeley has
explored the ubiquity of metaphor in language in books such as
Metaphors We Live By (with philosopher Mark Johnson), and Moral
Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think (where he demonstrates
how political power involves controlling metaphors—do you favor
“choice” or “life”? are you “tough on” crime, or does your “heart
bleed”? are you loyal to a “fatherland” or a “motherland”? and have you
captured the flag of “family values” from your opponent?). For Lakoff
language is always a metaphor, transferring information from one
individual to another by putting thought into words, as if words were
shopping bags.7
Symbols, metaphors, analogies, parables, synecdoche, figures of
speech. We understand that a captain wants more than just hands when
ordering all of them on deck, that Kafka’s Metamorphosis isn’t really
about a cockroach, and that June doesn’t really bust out all over. If we
are of a certain theological ilk, we see bread and wine intertwined with
body and blood. We learn that the orchestral sounds constituting the
1812 Overture represent Napoleon getting his ass kicked when retreating
from Moscow. And that “Napoleon getting his ass kicked” represents
thousands of soldiers dying cold and hungry, far from home.
557