recognition of faults of the Us, and more of a perception of oneself as an
atypical Us.
This is the immediate aftermath. Disappointingly, these effects are
usually transient. Individuals from across lines rarely stay in touch; in
one survey of Palestinian and Israeli teenagers, 91 percent were not.
Persistent reductions in prejudice usually involve exceptionalism—“Yes,
most Thems are awful, but I hung out with a Them once who was okay.”
When there is major transformation, the peace-mongering convert loses
street cred back home when they broadcast this. For example, no
prominent peace activist has emerged from the thousands of participants
in the Middle Eastern Seeds of Peace.*
Here’s a way to think about contact: instead of hating a Them for
what his ancestors did, you await the day that you’re irritated with him
for, say, eating the last s’more, or setting the office thermostat too low, or
never returning to its proper place in the barn that plowshare that used to
be a sword. Now, that’s progress. The core of that thought is Susan
Fiske’s demonstration that automatic other-race-face amygdala responses
can be undone when subjects think of that face as belonging to a person,
not a Them. The ability to individuate even monolithic and
deindividuated monsters can be remarkable.
A moving example of this is told by Pumla Gobodo-Madikizela in
her book A Human Being Died That Night: A South African Story of
Forgiveness (Cape Town: David Philip, 2003). Gobodo-Madikizela,
raised in a black township of apartheid South Africa, managed to forge
an educational path all the way to a PhD in clinical psychology. As a free
South Africa dawned, she worked on the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, where she had a task to give anyone pause. It concerned
Eugene de Kock, the man with the most literal apartheid-era blood on his
hands. De Kock had commanded the elite counterinsurgency unit of the
South African Police and personally overseen kidnappings, torture, and
murders of black activists. He had been tried, convicted, and given a life
sentence. Gobodo-Madikizela was to interview him about his death
squad; clinical psychologist that she is, over the course of over forty
hours talking with him, her main focus became to understand this man.
He was a predictably multifaceted, contradictory, real human, rather
than an archetype. He was remorseful in some ways, unrepentant in
others; indifferent to some of his appalling brutality while proud of his
patchwork of principles about whom he wouldn’t kill; he pointed fingers
629