questionnaire indicated support for a value of the subject’s ethnic
group.15
In-group obligation is shown by people feeling more need to make
amends for transgressions against an Us than against a Them. For the
former, people usually make amends to the wronged individual and act
more prosocially to the group overall. But people often make in-group
amends by being more antisocial to another group. Moreover, in such
scenarios, the guiltier the person feels about her in-group violation, the
worse she is to Thems.16
Thus, sometimes you help Us by directly helping Us, sometimes by
hurting Them. This raises a broad issue about in-group parochialism: is
the goal that your group do well, or simply better than Them? If the
former, maximizing absolute levels of in-group well-being is the goal,
and the levels of rewards to Them is irrelevant; if the latter, the goal is
maximizing the gap between Us and Them.
Both occur. Doing better rather than doing well makes sense in zero-
sum games where, say, only one team can win, and where winning with
scores of 1–0, 10–0, and 10–9 are equivalent. Moreover, for sectarian
sports fans, there is similar mesolimbic dopamine activation when the
home team wins or when a hated rival loses to a third party.*17 This is
schadenfreude, gloating, where their pain is your gain.
It’s problematic when non–zero sum games are viewed as zero-sum
(winner-take-all).18 It’s not a great mind-set to think you’ve won World
War III if afterward Us have two mud huts and three fire sticks and They
have only one of each.* A horrific version of this thinking occurred late
during World War I, when the Allies knew they had more resources (i.e.,
soldiers) than Germany. Therefore, the British commander, Douglas
Haig, declared a strategy of “ceaseless attrition,” where Britain went on
the offensive, no matter how many of his men were killed—as long as
the Germans lost at least as many.
So in-group parochialism is often more concerned about Us beating
Them than with Us simply doing well. This is the essence of tolerating
inequality in the name of loyalty. Consistent with that, priming loyalty
strengthens in-group favoritism and identification, while priming
equality does the opposite.19
Intertwined with in-group loyalty and favoritism is an enhanced
capacity for empathy. For example, the amygdala activates when
viewing fearful faces, but only of group members; when it’s an out-group
397