voice telling him to commit a crime; he does so.
Some courts have viewed this as not mitigating. If your friend
suggests that you mug someone, the law expects you to resist, even if it’s
an imaginary friend in your head.
But others see distinctions depending on qualities of the auditory
hallucinations. In that view, if a schizophrenic individual commits a
crime because a voice in his head demanded it, yes, his act was caused
by that voice, but that doesn’t excuse the crime. In contrast, consider a
schizophrenic individual committing a crime because thundering
choruses of taunting, threatening, cajoling voices in his head, complete
with baying hellhounds and choirs of trombones playing loud atonal
music, command him every waking moment to do the crime. When he
succumbs and does so, it is deemed more excusable, because those
voices constituted a compulsion to act.*
Thus in this view even a sensible homunculus can lose it and agree to
virtually anything, just to get the hellhounds and trombones to stop.
Starting a Behavior Versus Halting It
It is virtually ordained that any discussion of volition and biology
eventually considers the “Libet experiment.”18 In the 1980s
neuroscientist Benjamin Libet of UCSF reported something fascinating.
A subject is hooked up to an EEG machine, which monitors patterns of
electrical excitation in the brain. She sits quietly, looking at a clock. She
has been instructed to flick her wrist whenever she feels like it and to
note the time, down to the second, when she decided to do so.
Libet would identify something in the EEG data called a “readiness
potential”—a signal from the motor cortex and supplementary premotor
areas that a movement would soon be initiated. And consistently,
readiness potentials appeared about half a second before the reported
time of conscious intent to move. Interpretation: your brain “decided” to
move before you were even aware of it. Thus, how can you claim to have
chosen when to move, evidence of free will, if the cascade of neural
signaling culminating in movement started before you consciously
chose? Free will is an illusion.
Naturally, this finding generated speculation, controversy,
replications, elaborations, refutations, and nuances that are beyond me.
One criticism concerned a necessary limitation of the approach. In this
595