a biological disease or a social construct?
In the extreme “It’s just a social construct” school, PMS is entirely
culture specific, meaning it occurs only in certain societies. Margaret
Mead started this by asserting in 1928 in Coming of Age in Samoa that
Samoan women don’t have mood or behavioral changes when
menstruating. Since the Samoans were enshrined by Mead as the coolest,
most peaceful and sexually free primates east of bonobos, this started
trendy anthropological claims that women in other hip, minimal-clothing
cultures had no PMS either.* And naturally, cultures with rampant PMS
(e.g., American primates) were anti-Samoans, where symptoms arose
from mistreatment and sexual repression of women. This view even had
room for a socioeconomic critique, with howlers like “PMS [is] a mode
for the expression of women’s anger resulting from her oppressed
position in American capitalist society.”*62
An offshoot of this view is the idea that in such repressive societies,
it’s the most repressed women who have the worst PMS. Thus,
depending on the paper, women with bad PMS must be anxious,
depressed, neurotic, hypochondriacal, sexually repressed, toadies of
religious repression, or more compliant with gender stereotypes and must
respond to challenge by withdrawing, rather than by tackling things head
on. In other words, not a single cool Samoan among them.
Fortunately, this has mostly subsided. Numerous studies show
normal shifts in the brain and behavior over the course of the
reproductive cycle, with as many behavioral correlates of ovulation as of
menses.*63 PMS, then, is simply a disruptively extreme version of those
shifts. While PMS is real, symptoms vary by culture. For example,
perimenstrual women in China report less negative affect than do
Western women (raising the issue of whether they experience less and/or
report less). Given the more than one hundred symptoms linked to PMS,
it’s not surprising if different symptoms predominate in different
populations.
As strong evidence that perimenstrual mood and behavioral changes
are biological, they occur in other primates.64 Both female baboons and
female vervet monkeys become more aggressive and less social before
their menses (without, to my knowledge, having issues with American
capitalism). Interestingly, the baboon study showed increased
aggressiveness only in dominant females; presumably, subordinate
females simply couldn’t express increased aggressiveness.
119