SOME TRADITIONAL ROUTES
F
irst there’s the strategy for reducing violence that stretches back tens
of thousands of years—moving. If two individuals in a hunter-
gatherer band are having tensions, one frequently shifts to a neighboring
band, sometimes voluntarily, sometimes not. Similarly, interband
tensions are reduced when one shifts to a different location, an advantage
of nomadicism. A recent study of the hunter-gathering Hadza of
Tanzania showed an additional benefit to this fluidity straight out of
chapter 10. Specifically, it facilitates highly cooperative individuals
associating with one another.6
Then there are the beneficial effects of trade, as emphasized by
anthropologists, as well as Pinker. From trading at a village market to
signing international trade agreements, it is often true that where goods
do not pass frontiers, armies will. It’s a version of Thomas Friedman’s
somewhat tongue-in-cheek Golden Arches Theory of peace—countries
with McDonald’s don’t fight one another. While there are exceptions
(e.g., the U.S. invasion of Panama, the Israeli invasion of Lebanon),
Friedman’s broad point holds—countries that are sufficiently stable that
they are integrated into global markets with the likes of McDonald’s and
prosperous enough that their people keep those establishments in
business likely conclude that the trade advantages of peace outweigh the
imagined spoils of war.**7
This isn’t surefire—for example, despite being major trading
partners, Germany and the UK fought World War I—and there’s no
shortage of people willing to go to war, even at the cost of disrupted
trade and scarce commodities. Moreover, “trade” is double-edged. It’s
certifiably groovy when occurring between indigenous rain forest
hunters; it’s certifiably vile if you’re protesting the WTO. But as long as
countries can wage war on distant nations, long-distance trade that
makes them interdependent is a good deterrent.
Cultural diffusion in general (which includes trade) can also facilitate
peace. This can have a modern tint—across 189 countries, digital access
predicts increased civil liberties and media freedom. Moreover, the more
621