Logically, landmarks of adolescent maturation in brain and behavior are
less related to chronological age than to the time since puberty onset.8
Moreover, puberty is not just about the onslaught of gonadal
hormones. It’s about how they come online.9 The defining feature of
ovarian endocrine function is the cyclicity of hormone release—“It’s that
time of the month.” In adolescent females puberty does not arrive full
flower, so to speak, with one’s first period. Instead, for the first few years
only about half of cycles actually involve ovulation and surges of
estrogen and progesterone. Thus, not only are young adolescents
experiencing these first ovulatory cycles, but there are also higher-order
fluctuations in whether the ovulatory fluctuation occurs. Meanwhile,
while adolescent males don’t have equivalent hormonal gyrations, it
can’t help that their frontal cortex keeps getting hypoxic from the priapic
blood flow to the crotch.
Thus, as adolescence dawns, frontal cortical efficiency is diluted with
extraneous synapses failing to make the grade, sluggish communication
thanks to undermyelination, and a jumble of uncoordinated subregions
working at cross-purposes; moreover, while the striatum is trying to help,
a pinch hitter for the frontal cortex gets you only so far. Finally, the
frontal cortex is being pickled in that ebb and flow of gonadal hormones.
No wonder they act adolescent.
Frontal Cortical Changes in Cognition in
Adolescence
To appreciate what frontal cortical maturation has to do with our best
and worst behaviors, it’s helpful to first see how such maturation plays
out in cognitive realms.
During adolescence there’s steady improvement in working memory,
flexible rule use, executive organization, and frontal inhibitory regulation
(e.g., task shifting). In general, these improvements are accompanied by
increasing activity in frontal regions during tasks, with the extent of the
increase predicting accuracy.10
Adolescents also improve at mentalization tasks (understanding
someone else’s perspective). By this I don’t mean emotional perspective
(stay tuned) but purer cognitive challenges, like understanding what
objects look like from someone else’s perspective. The improvement in
156