consequentialist decisions when we engage both our reasoning and our
intuition. “Sure, being willing to do X in order to accomplish Y seems
like a good trade-off in the short run. But in the long run, if we do that
often enough, doing Z is going to start to seem okay also, and I’d feel
awful if Z were done to me, and there’s also a good chance that W would
happen, and that’s going to generate really bad feelings in people, which
will result in . . .” And the “feel” part of that process is not the way Mr.
Spock would do it, logically and dispassionately remembering that those
humans are irrational, flighty creatures and incorporating that into his
rational thinking about them. Instead, this is feeling what the feelings
would feel like. This is straight out of chapter 2’s overview of Damasio’s
somatic marker hypothesis: when we are making decisions, we are
running not only thought experiments but somatic feeling experiments as
well—how is it going to feel if this happens?—and this combination is
the goal in moral decision making.
Thus, “No way I’d push someone onto the trolley tracks; it’s just
wrong” is about the amygdala, insula, and vmPFC. “Sacrifice one life to
save five, sure” is the dlPFC. But do long-term strategic
consequentialism, and all those regions are engaged. And this yields
something more powerful than the cocksureness of knee-jerk
intuitionism, the “I can’t tell you why, but this is simply wrong.” When
you’ve engaged all those brain systems, when you’ve done the thought
experiments and feeling experiments of how things might play out in the
long run, and when you’ve prioritized the inputs—gut reactions are taken
seriously, but they’re sure not given veto power—you’ll know exactly
why something seems right or wrong.
The synergistic advantages of combining reasoning with intuition
raise an important point. If you’re a fan of moral intuitions, you’d frame
them as being foundational and primordial. If you don’t like them, you’d
present them as simplistic, reflexive, and primitive. But as emphasized
by Woodward and Allman, our moral intuitions are neither primordial
nor reflexively primitive. They are the end products of learning; they are
cognitive conclusions to which we have been exposed so often that they
have become automatic, as implicit as riding a bicycle or reciting the
days of the week forward rather than backward. In the West we nearly all
have strong moral intuitions about the wrongness of slavery, child labor,
or animal cruelty. But that sure didn’t used to be the case. Their
wrongness has become an implicit moral intuition, a gut instinct
507