doesn’t pay attention to fluctuations of testosterone levels within the
normal range.2
(Things differ when levels are made “supraphysiological”—higher
than the body normally generates. This is the world of athletes and
bodybuilders abusing high-dose testosterone-like anabolic steroids; in
that situation risk of aggression does increase. Two complications: it’s
not random who would choose to take these drugs, and abusers are often
already predisposed toward aggression; supraphysiological levels of
androgens generate anxiety and paranoia, and increased aggression may
be secondary to that.)3
Thus, aggression is typically more about social learning than about
testosterone, and differing levels of testosterone generally can’t explain
why some individuals are more aggressive than others. So what does
testosterone actually do to behavior?
Subtleties of Testosterone Effects
When looking at faces expressing strong emotions, we tend to make
microexpressions that mimic them; testosterone decreases such empathic
mimicry.*4 Moreover, testosterone makes people less adept at identifying
emotions by looking at people’s eyes, and faces of strangers activate the
amygdala more than familiar ones and are rated as less trustworthy.
Testosterone also increases confidence and optimism, while
decreasing fear and anxiety.5 This explains the “winner” effect in lab
animals, where winning a fight increases an animal’s willingness to
participate in, and its success in, another such interaction. Part of the
increased success probably reflects the fact that winning stimulates
testosterone secretion, which increases glucose delivery and metabolism
in the animal’s muscles and makes his pheromones smell scarier.
Moreover, winning increases the number of testosterone receptors in the
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (the way station through which the
amygdala communicates with the rest of the brain), increasing its
sensitivity to the hormone. Success in everything from athletics to chess
to the stock market boosts testosterone levels.
Confident and optimistic. Well, endless self-help books urge us to be
precisely that. But testosterone makes people overconfident and overly
optimistic, with bad consequences. In one study, pairs of subjects could
101