people are more likely to endorse greed as being good, to view the class
system as fair and meritocratic, and to view their success as an act of
independence—all great ways to decide that someone else’s distress is
beneath your notice or concern.
It is a particularly uphill battle when we are asked to empathize with
the pain of people we dislike, whom we morally disapprove of—
remember how their misfortune doesn’t simply fail to activate the ACC
but instead it activates mesolimbic dopamine reward pathways. Thus the
process of taking their perspective and feeling their pain (as other than
grounds for gloating) is a dramatic cognitive challenge rather than
something remotely automatic.26
The cognitive “costs” of empathizing with someone distant are
shown by increasing people’s cognitive load (i.e., making their frontal
cortex work harder by forcing it to override a habitual behavior)—they
become less helpful to strangers but not to family members. “Empathy
fatigue” can thus be viewed as the state when the cognitive load of
repeated exposure to the pain of Thems whose perspective is challenging
to take has exhausted the frontal cortex. The notions of cognitive work
and load also help explain why people are more charitable when
contemplating one person in need than a group. To quote Mother Teresa,
“If I look at the mass, I will never act. If I look at the one, I will.” Or to
cite a quote attributed to someone who never seems to have achieved
enough empathy to be vulnerable to empathy fatigue, Joseph Stalin:
“The death of one man is a tragedy; the death of millions is a statistic.”27
And probably most reliably, those mentalizing pathways are
activated when we switch from focusing on what it would feel like if this
were happening to us to focusing on what it must feel like for them. Thus
when subjects are instructed to switch from first- to third-person
perspective, there’s not just activation of the TPJ but also frontal
activation with the top-down regulatory task “Stop thinking about
yourself.”28
Thus we have themes that closely resemble those from the last few
chapters. When it comes to empathic states, “emotion” and “cognition”
are totally false dichotomies; you need both, but with the balance
between the two shifting on a continuum, and the cognition end of it has
to do the heavy lifting when the differences between you and the person
in pain initially swap the similarities.
Time now for one of the great sideshows in empathy science.
534