opposing officers in no-man’s-land. The truce began as an agreement to
halt hostilities during Christmas dinner and for retrieval of the dead.
Things spread from there. As extensively documented, soldiers on
both sides loaned each other shovels for digging graves. And then helped
out. And then held joint burial services. Which led to exchanges of food,
drink, and tobacco. Eventually, unarmed soldiers swarmed into no-
man’s-land, prayed and caroled together, shared dinner, exchanged gifts.
Enemy combatants took group portraits; buttons and helmets were
exchanged as souvenirs; plans were made to meet when the war was
over. Most famously, soccer matches were held with improvised balls,
with scores rarely kept.57
One historian records a chilling anecdote concerning a German
soldier writing home about the truce, mentioning that not everyone
participated—there was one soldier who condemned the others as
traitors, an obscure corporal named . . . Hitler. But for most of the five
hundred miles of trenches, the truce held through Christmas, and often
even New Year’s. It took officers’ threats of court-martial to get
everyone back to fighting, soldiers wishing their counterparts a safe war.
Stunning, moving, heartbreaking. And with only sporadic exceptions, it
never happened again, as even brief Christmas truces to retrieve the dead
led to court-martials.
Why did the 1914 truce work? The unique static nature of trench
warfare meant that soldiers faced each other day after day. This
prompted often-friendly taunting across the lines in the period preceding
Christmas, establishing a vague sense of connection. Moreover, the
repeated interactions produced a “shadow of the future”—betray the
truce, and expect no-holds-barred revenge.
The success was also aided by everyone sharing the same Judeo-
Christian tradition and Western European culture; many knew the others’
language, had visited the others’ country. They were of the same race,
and pejoratively calling the enemy “Fritz” completely differs from the
pseudospeciation of the Vietnam War’s “gooks,” “slants,” and “dinks.”
Additional factors explain why the truce mostly involved British and
German troops. While the French fought passionately on their own soil,
Brits had no particular animosity toward Germans and typically
perceived themselves as fighting to save les derrières of the French, their
frequent historical enemy. Ironically, during the truce British soldiers
would tell Germans that they both should be fighting the French.
664