sensory roads lead to the brain. But the brain also sends neuronal
projections to sensory organs. For example, low blood sugar might
activate particular hypothalamic neurons. These, in turn, project to and
stimulate receptor neurons in the nose that respond to food smells. The
stimulation isn’t enough to give those receptor neurons action potentials,
but it now takes fewer food odorant molecules to trigger one. Something
along these lines explains how the brain alters the selective sensitivity of
sensory systems.
This certainly applies to the behaviors that fill this book. Recall how
eyes carry lots of information about emotional state. It turns out that the
brain biases us toward preferentially looking at eyes. This was shown by
Damasio, studying a patient with Urbach-Wiethe disease, which
selectively destroys the amygdala. As expected, she was poor at
accurately detecting fearful faces. But in addition, while control subjects
spent about half their face-gazing time looking at eyes, she spent half
that. When instructed to focus on the eyes, she improved at recognizing
fearful expressions. Thus, not only does the amygdala detect fearful
faces, but it also biases us toward obtaining information about fearful
faces.41
Psychopaths are typically poor at recognizing fearful expressions
(though they accurately recognize other types).42 They also look less at
eyes than normal and improve at fear recognition when directed to focus
on eyes. This makes sense, given the amygdaloid abnormalities in
psychopaths noted in chapter 2.
Now an example foreshadowing chapter 9’s focus on culture. Show
subjects a picture of an object embedded in a complex background.
Within seconds, people from collectivist cultures (e.g., China) tend to
look more at, and remember better, the surrounding “contextual”
information, while people from individualistic cultures (e.g., the United
States) do the same with the focal object. Instruct subjects to focus on the
domain that their culture doesn’t gravitate toward, and there’s frontal
cortical activation—this is a difficult perceptual task. Thus, culture
literally shapes how and where you look at the world.*43
96