It’s disgusting, the things people weren’t disgusted by in the past.
Disgust is a moving target.
Thus issues anchored in the insula help explain differences in
political orientation; this point will be returned to in chapter 17.48
Additional neurobiological differences have been demonstrated.
Liberalism has been associated with larger amounts of gray matter in the
cingulate cortex (with its involvement in empathy), whereas
conservatism has been associated with an enlarged amygdala (with, of
course, its starring role in threat perception). Moreover, there’s more
amygdala activation in conservatives than in liberals when viewing a
disgusting image or doing a risky task.
But not all the findings fit easily. For example, when looking at
disgusting images, conservatives also show relatively greater activation
of a hodgepodge of other brain regions—the basal ganglia, thalamus,
periaqueductal gray, (cognitive) dlPFC, middle/superior temporal gyrus,
presupplementary motor, fusiform, and inferior frontal gyrus. How all
those fit together isn’t clear.
Naturally, one must ask: have behavior geneticists reported genetic
influences on political orientation? Twin studies report heritability of
about 50 percent for political orientation. Genomewide survey
approaches have identified genes whose polymorphic variants were
associated with political orientation. Most of the genes had no known
functions, or were previously thought to be unrelated to the brain; those
whose brain-related functions were known (for example, one coded for a
receptor for the neurotransmitter glutamate) don’t teach much about
political orientation. As an interesting gene/environment interaction, the
“risk-taking” version of the D4 dopamine receptor gene is associated
with liberals—but only in people with lots of friends. Moreover, some
studies show a genetic association with people’s likelihood of voting,
independent of political orientation.49
Interesting. However, the approach comes with all of chapter 8’s
caveats—most findings haven’t been replicated, reported effects are
small, and these are published in political science journals rather than
genetics journals. Finally, to the extent that genes are related to political
orientation, links are likely to be via intervening factors, such as the
tendency toward anxiety.
455