more aggression and less interest in infants. In addition, CAH women are
more likely to be gay or bisexual or have a transgender sexual identity.*
Importantly, drug treatments begun soon after birth normalize
androgen levels in these girls, so that the excessive androgen exposure is
solely prenatal. Thus prenatal testosterone exposure appears to cause
organizational changes that increase the incidence of male-typical
behaviors.
A similar conclusion is reached by an inverse of CAH, namely
androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS, historically called “testicular
feminization syndrome”).69 A fetus is male—XY chromosomes, testes
that secrete testosterone. But a mutation in the androgen receptor makes
it insensitive to testosterone. Thus the testes can secrete testosterone till
the cows come home but there won’t be any masculinization. And often
the individual is born with a female external phenotype and is raised as a
girl. Along comes puberty, she’s not getting periods, and a trip to the
doctor reveals that the “girl” is actually a “boy” (with testes typically
near the stomach, plus a shortened vagina that dead-ends). The
individual usually continues with a female identity but is infertile as an
adult. In other words, when human males don’t experience the
organizational prenatal effects of testosterone, you get female-typical
behaviors and identification.
Between CAH and AIS, the issue seems settled—prenatal
testosterone plays a major role in explaining sex differences in
aggression and various affiliative prosocial behaviors in humans.
Careful readers may have spotted two whopping big problems with
this conclusion:70
Remember that CAH girls are born with a “something’s
very different” Post-it—the ambiguous genitalia,
typically requiring multiple reconstructive surgeries.
CAH females are not merely prenatally androgenized.
They’re also raised by parents who know something is
different, have slews of doctors mighty interested in
their privates, and are treated with all sorts of hormones.
It’s impossible to attribute the behavioral profile solely
to the prenatal androgens.
Testosterone has no effects in AIS individuals because
of the androgen receptor mutation. But doesn’t
218