mentioned in passing that he had a heart condition. As shock intensity
increased, this learner would scream about chest pains and then go silent,
seemingly having passed out.)
Amid the screams of pain, teachers would typically become hesitant,
at which point they’d be urged on by the scientist with commands of
increasing intensity: “Please continue.” “The experiment requires that
you continue.” “It is absolutely essential that you continue.” “You have
no other choice. You must go on.” And, the scientist assured them, they
weren’t responsible; the learner had been informed of the risks.
And the famed result was that most volunteers complied, shocking
the learner repeatedly. Teachers would typically try to stop, argue with
the scientist, would even weep in distress—but would obey. In the
original study, horrifically, 65 percent of them administered the
maximum shock of 450 volts.
—
And then there’s the Stanford Prison Experiment (SPE), carried out by
Zimbardo in 1971.64 Twenty-four young male volunteers, mostly college
students, were randomly split into a group of twelve “prisoners” and
twelve “guards.” The prisoners were to spend seven to fourteen days
jailed in a pseudoprison in the basement of Stanford’s psychology
department. The guards were to keep order.
Tremendous effort went into making the SPE realistic. The future
prisoners thought they were scheduled to show up at the building at a
particular time to start the study. Instead, Palo Alto police helped
Zimbardo by showing up earlier at each prisoner’s home, arresting him,
and taking him to the police station for booking—fingerprinting, mug
shots, the works. Prisoners were then deposited in the “prison,” strip-
searched, given prison garb, along with stocking hats to simulate their
heads being shaved, and dumped as trios in cells.
The guards, in surplus military khakis, batons, and reflective
sunglasses, ruled. They had been informed that while there was no
violence allowed, they could make the prisoners feel bored, afraid,
helpless, humiliated, and without a sense of privacy or individuality.
And the result was just as famously horrific as that of the Milgram
experiment. The guards put prisoners through pointless, humiliating
rituals of obedience, forced painful exercise, deprived them of sleep and
food, forced them to relieve themselves in unemptied buckets in the cells
462