“masculinization” of the cortex. An interaction between receptor variant
and testosterone levels occurs. High basal testosterone levels do not
predict elevated levels of aggressive mood or of amygdaloid reactivity to
threatening faces in males—except in those with that variant.
Interestingly, the equivalent variant predicts aggressiveness in Akita
dogs.
How important are these findings? A key theme in chapter 4 was
how little individual differences in testosterone levels in the normal
range predict individual differences in behavior. How much more
predictability is there when combining knowledge of testosterone levels
and of receptor sensitivity? Not much. How about hormone levels and
receptor sensitivity and number of receptors? Still not much. But
definitely an improvement in predictive power.
Similar themes concern the genetics of the estrogen receptor.56 For
example, different receptor variants are associated with higher rates of
anxiety among women, but not men, and higher rates of antisocial
behavior and conduct disorder in men, but not women. Meanwhile, in
genetically manipulated mice, the presence or absence of the receptor
gene influences aggression in females . . . depending on how many
brothers there were in the litter in utero—gene/environment again. Once
again, the magnitude of these genetic influences is tiny.
Finally, there is work on genes related to glucocorticoids, particularly
regarding gene/environment interactions.57 For example, there is an
interaction between one variant of the gene for a type of receptor for
glucocorticoids (for mavens: it’s the MR receptor) and childhood abuse
in producing an amygdala that is hyperreactive to threat. Then there is a
protein called FKBP5, which modifies the activity of another type of
receptor for glucocorticoids (the GR receptor); one FKBP5 variant is
associated with aggression, hostility, PTSD, and hyperreactivity of the
amygdala to threat—but only when coupled with childhood abuse.
Buoyed by these findings, some researchers have examined two
candidate genes simultaneously. For example, having both “risk”
variants of 5HTT and DRD4 synergistically increases the risk of
disruptive behavior in kids—an effect exacerbated by low
socioeconomic status.58
Phew; all these pages and we’ve only gotten to thinking about two
genes and one environmental variable simultaneously. And despite this,
things still aren’t great:
259