Intuitively, if good acts must be motivated by self-interest, the
reputational motive, the desire to be the biggest spender at the charity
auction, seems most worthy of irony. In contrast, the motivation to think
of yourself as a good person seems a pretty benign one. After all, we’re
all searching for a sense of self, and better that particular sense than to
assure yourself that you’re tough, scary, and not to be messed with.
Is the element of self-interest ever truly absent? One 2007 study in
Science examined this.56 Subjects (in brain scanners, of course) were
unexpectedly given varying amounts of money. Then, some of the time
they were “taxed” (i.e., told that a certain percentage of that money
would be forcibly given to a food bank), some of the time given the
opportunity to donate that amount voluntarily. In other words, the exact
same amount of public “good” was accomplished in each case, but the
former constituted enforced civic duty while the latter was a purely
charitable act. Thus, if someone’s altruism is purely other-oriented,
without a smidgen of self-interest, the two circumstances are
psychologically identical—those in need are being helped, and that’s all
that matters. And the more different the scenarios feel, the more self-
interest is coming into play.
The results were complex and interesting:
a. The more people’s dopaminergic reward systems activated
when they unexpectedly received money, the less activation there
was when they were either taxed or asked to donate. In other
words, the greater the love of money, the more painfully it is
parted with. No surprise there.
b. The more dopaminergic activation there was when someone
was taxed, the more voluntarily charitable they were. Being
taxed could not have been welcome to the most self-interested—
money was being taken from them. For subjects who instead
showed heavy activation of dopaminergic systems in that
circumstance, any self-interest of losing money was more than
compensated for by the knowledge that people in need were
being helped. This taps into the last chapter’s exploration of
inequity aversion and is consistent with findings that in some
circumstances, when a pair of strangers are openly given unequal
amounts of reward, there is typically dopaminergic activation in
547