just literal distance but something resembling “social” distance; as
evidence, mirror neuron activity would decrease if there was a
transparent barrier between the observer and observed. In Gallese’s
words, “this shows the relevance of mirror neurons when mapping the
potentialities for competition or cooperation between agent and
observer.”
The notion that mirror neurons aid us in understanding someone
else’s actions, leading to our understanding someone else, period, has
been heavily criticized on two grounds, most notably by Hickok. First is
the issue of causality—while some studies show that mirror neuron
activity correlates with attempts at understanding someone else’s
perspective, there is minimal evidence that such activity causes the
understanding. The second criticism concerns something obvious: we
can understand the intent behind someone else’s actions even if we can’t
remotely perform them ourselves. This would apply to actions of the
observed individual ranging from pole-vaulting eighteen feet to
explaining special relativity.
Supporters of this role for mirror neurons admit this but argue that
they provide an extra level of understanding. Gallese writes, “I submit
that it is only through the activation of Mirror Neurons that we can grasp
the meaning of other’s behavior from within”37 (my emphasis). This is
not my area of research, and I’m not trying to be snarky, but it seems like
he’s saying that there’s understanding and then there’s super-duper
understanding, and the latter requires mirror neurons.
—
These mirror neuron speculations have been extended to focus on
autism, a disorder in which there are profound impairments in
understanding other people’s actions and intentions.38 According to the
“broken mirror” hypothesis of mirror neuron pioneer Marco Iacoboni of
UCLA, mirror neuron dysfunction underlies those aspects of autism.
This has been examined by scads of researchers, with findings varying
depending on the paradigm; most meta-analyses conclude that there is
nothing flagrantly wrong with the formal features of mirror neuron
function in autistic individuals.
Thus, while mirror neurons’ activity correlates with attempts to
understand other people’s actions, their involvement seems neither
necessary nor sufficient and is most pertinent to low-level, concrete
538