into a group of superstar chickens who, presumably, will be hugely
productive. Instead, egg production is miniscule.45
Why was each superstar the egg queen in her original group?
Because she would aggressively peck subordinates enough to stress them
into reduced fertility. Put all these mean ones together, and a group of
subordinated chickens will outproduce them.
This is a world away from “animals behave for the good of the
species.” Instead, this is the circumstance of a genetically influenced trait
that, while adaptive on an individual level, emerges as maladaptive when
shared by a group and where there is competition between groups (e.g.,
for an ecological niche).
There’s been considerable resistance to neo–group selectionism. Part
of it is visceral, often pronounced among the old guard—“Great, we’ve
finally confiscated all the Wild Kingdom videos, and now we’re back to
playing Whac-A-Mole with group selection sentimentality?” But the
more fundamental resistance is from people who distinguish bad old
group selection from neo–group selection, accept that the latter can
occur, but think it’s very rare.
Maybe so, across the animal kingdom. But neo–group selection plays
out with great frequency and consequence in humans. Groups compete
for hunting grounds, pastures, water sources. Cultures magnify the
intensity of between-group selection and lessen within-group selection
with ethnocentrism, religious intolerance, race-based politics, and so on.
The economist Samuel Bowles, of the Santa Fe Institute, emphasizes
how intergroup conflict like war is the driving force for intragroup
cooperation (“parochial altruism”); he refers to intergroup conflict as
“altruism’s midwife.”46
Most in the field now both accept multilevel selection and see room
for instances of neo–group selection, especially in humans. Much of this
reemergence is the work of two scientists. The first is David Sloan
Wilson of the State University of New York at Binghamton, who spent
decades pushing for neo–group selection (although he sees it not really
as “neo” but rather as old-style group selection finally getting some
scientific rigor), generally being dismissed, and arguing his case with
research of his own, studies ranging from fish sociality to the evolution
of religion. He slowly convinced some people, most importantly the
second scientist, Edward O. Wilson of Harvard (no relation). E. O.
Wilson is arguably the most important naturalist of the last half of the
366