Novelty craving permeates adolescence; it is when we usually
develop our stable tastes in music, food, and fashion, with openness to
novelty declining thereafter.17 And it’s not just a human phenomenon.
Across the rodent life span, it’s adolescents who are most willing to eat a
new food. Adolescent novelty seeking is particularly strong in other
primates. Among many social mammals, adolescents of one sex leave
their natal group, emigrating into another population, a classic means to
avoid inbreeding. Among impalas there are groups of related females
and offspring with one breeding male; the other males knock around
disconsolately in “bachelor herds,” each scheming to usurp the breeding
male. When a young male hits puberty, he is driven from the group by
the breeding male (and to avoid some Oedipus nonsense, this is unlikely
to be his father, who reigned many breeding males ago).
But not among primates. Take baboons. Suppose two troops
encounter each other at some natural boundary—say, a stream. The
males threaten each other for a while, eventually get bored, and resume
whatever they were doing. Except there’s an adolescent, standing at the
stream’s edge, riveted. New baboons, a whole bunch of ’em! He runs
five steps toward them, runs back four, nervous, agitated. He gingerly
crosses and sits on the other bank, scampering back should any new
baboon glance at him.
So begins the slow process of transferring, spending more time each
day with the new troop until he breaks the umbilical cord and spends the
night. He wasn’t pushed out. Instead, if he has to spend one more day
with the same monotonous baboons he’s known his whole life, he’ll
scream. Among adolescent chimps it’s females who can’t get off the
farm fast enough. We primates aren’t driven out at adolescence. Instead
we desperately crave novelty.*
Thus, adolescence is about risk taking and novelty seeking. Where
does the dopamine reward system fit in?
Recall from chapter 2 how the ventral tegmentum is the source of the
mesolimbic dopamine projection to the nucleus accumbens, and of the
mesocortical dopamine projection to the frontal cortex. During
adolescence, dopamine projection density and signaling steadily increase
in both pathways (although novelty seeking itself peaks at
midadolescence, probably reflecting the emerging frontal regulation after
that).18
159