“montane vole” polygamous version of the vasopressin receptor gene
promoter will have numerous failed marriages? That a person with a
particular array of glutamate receptor subtypes throughout their cortex
and hippocampus will have an IQ above 140? That someone raised with
extensive childhood adversity and loss will have a major depressive
disorder? All under 50 percent, often way under.
So how do a fractured leg inevitably impairing locomotion and the
noninevitabilities of the previous paragraph differ? Do the latter
somehow involve “less” biology? Is the point that the brain contains a
nonbiological homunculus but that leg bones do not?
Hopefully, after this many pages, the start of an answer is apparent.
It’s not that there’s “less” biology in those circumstances related to social
behavior. It’s that it’s qualitatively different biology.
When a bone shatters, there’s a relatively straight line of steps
leading to inflammation and pain that will impair the person’s gait
(should he try to walk an hour later). That straight line of biology won’t
be altered by conventional variation in his genome, his prenatal hormone
exposure, the culture he was raised in, or when he ate lunch. But as
we’ve seen, all of those variables can influence social behaviors that
shape our best and worst moments.
The biology of the behaviors that interest us is, in all cases,
multifactorial—that is the thesis of this book.
Let’s see what “multifactorial” means in a practical sense. Consider
someone with frequent depression who is visiting a friend today, pouring
her heart out about her problems. How much could you have predicted
the global depression and today’s behavior by knowing about her
biology?
Suppose “knowing about her biology” consisted only of knowing
what version of the serotonin transporter gene she has. How much
predictive power does that give you? As we saw in chapter 8, not much
—say, 10 percent. What if “knowing about her biology” consists of
knowing the status of that gene plus knowing if one of her parents died
when she was a child? More, maybe 25 percent. How knowing her
serotonin transporter gene status + childhood adversity status + whether
she is living alone in poverty? Maybe up to 40 percent. Add knowledge
of the average level of glucocorticoids in her bloodstream today. Maybe
a bit more. Toss in knowing if she’s living in an individualist or a
collectivist culture. Some more predictability.* Know if she is
603