high glucocorticoid levels to healthy subjects impaired working memory
into the range seen after frontal cortical damage. Glucocorticoids
accomplish this by enhancing norepinephrine signaling in the PFC so
much that, instead of causing aroused focus, it induces chicken-with-its-
head-cut-off cognitive tumult, and by enhancing disruptive signaling
from the amygdala to the PFC. Stress also desynchronizes activation in
different frontocortical regions, which impairs the ability to shift
attention between tasks.73
These stress effects on frontal function also make us perseverative—
in a rut, set in our ways, running on automatic, being habitual. We all
know this—what do we typically do during a stressful time when
something isn’t working? The same thing again, many more times, faster
and more intensely—it becomes unimaginable that the usual isn’t
working. This is precisely where the frontal cortex makes you do the
harder but more correct thing—recognize that it’s time for a change.
Except for a stressed frontal cortex, or one that’s been exposed to a lot of
glucocorticoids. In rats, monkeys, and humans, stress weakens frontal
connections with the hippocampus—essential for incorporating the new
information that should prompt shifting to a new strategy—while
strengthening frontal connections with more habitual brain circuits.74
Finally, the decreased frontal function and increased amygdaloid
function during stress alter risk-taking behavior. For example, the stress
of sleep deprivation or of public speaking, or the administration of high
glucocorticoid levels, shifts people from protecting against losses to
seeking bigger gains when gambling. This involves an interesting gender
difference—in general, major stressors make people of both genders
more risk taking. But moderate stressors bias men toward, and women
away from, risk taking. In the absence of stress, men tend toward more
risk taking than women; thus, once again, hormones enhance a
preexisting tendency.75
Whether one becomes irrationally risk taking (failing to shift strategy
in response to a declining reward rate) or risk averse (failing to respond
to the opposite), one is incorporating new information poorly. Stated
most broadly, sustained stress impairs risk assessment.76
Sustained Stress and Pro- and Antisociality
127