THOSE THEMS
J
ust as we view Us in standardized ways, there are patterns in how we
view Them. A consistent one is viewing Them as threatening, angry,
and untrustworthy. Take space aliens in movies, as an interesting
example. In an analysis of nearly a hundred pertinent movies, starting
with Georges Méliès’s pioneering 1902 A Trip to the Moon, nearly 80
percent present aliens as malevolent, with the remainder either
benevolent or neutral.* In economic games people implicitly treat
members of other races as less trustworthy or reciprocating. Whites
judge African American faces as angrier than white faces, and racially
ambiguous faces with angry expressions are more likely to be
categorized as the other race. White subjects become more likely to
support juvenile criminals being tried as adults when primed to think
about black (versus white) offenders. And the unconscious sense of
Them as menacing can be remarkably abstract—baseball fans tend to
underestimate the distance to a rival team’s stadium, while Americans
hostile to Mexican immigrants underestimate the distance to Mexico
City.
But Thems do not solely evoke a sense of menace; sometimes it’s
disgust. Back to the insular cortex, which in most animals is about
gustatory disgust—biting into rotten food—but whose human portfolio
includes moral and aesthetic disgust. Pictures of drug addicts or the
homeless typically activate the insula, not the amygdala.25
Being disgusted by another group’s abstract beliefs isn’t naturally the
role of the insula, which evolved to care about disgusting tastes and
smells. Us/Them markers provide a stepping-stone. Feeling disgusted by
Them because they eat repulsive, sacred, or adorable things, slather
themselves with rancid scents, dress in scandalous ways—these are
things the insula can sink its teeth into. In the words of the psychologist
Paul Rozin of the University of Pennsylvania, “Disgust serves as an
ethnic or out-group marker.” Establishing that They eat disgusting things
provides momentum for deciding that They also have disgusting ideas
about, say, deontological ethics.26
401