Most of all, play is intrinsically pleasurable—why else perform a
smidgen of a behavioral sequence in an irrelevant setting? Dopaminergic
pathways activate during play; juvenile rats, when playing, emit the same
vocalizations as when rewarded with food; dogs spend half their calories
wagging their tails to pheromonally announce their presence and
availability for play. As emphasized by the psychiatrist Stuart Brown,
founder of the National Institute for Play, the opposite of play is not
work—it’s depression. A challenge is to understand how the brain codes
for the reinforcing properties of the variety of play. After all, play
encompasses everything from mathematicians besting each other with
hilarious calculus jokes to kids besting each other by making hilarious
fart sounds with their armpits.
One significant type of play involves fragments of aggression, what
Harlow called “rough and tumble” play—kids wrestling, adolescent
impalas butting heads, puppies play-biting each other.53 Males typically
do it more than females, and as we’ll see soon, it’s boosted by prenatal
testosterone. Is rough-and-tumble play practice for life’s looming status
tournament, or are you already in the arena? A mixture of both.
Expanding beyond peers, neighborhoods readily communicate
culture to kids. Is there garbage everywhere? Are houses decrepit?
What’s ubiquitous—bars, churches, libraries, or gun shops? Are there
many parks, and are they safe to enter? Do billboards, ads, and bumper
stickers sell religious or material paradises, celebrate acts of martyrdom
or kindness and inclusiveness?
—
And then we get to culture at the level of tribes, nations, and states. Here,
briefly, are some of the broadest cultural differences in child-rearing
practices.
Collectivist Versus Individualist Cultures
As will be seen in chapter 9, this is the most studied cultural contrast,
typically comparing collectivist East Asian cultures with
überindividualist America. Collectivist cultures emphasize
interdependence, harmony, fitting in, the needs and responsibilities of the
group; in contrast, individualist cultures value independence,
competition, the needs and rights of the individual.
206