and gained the means to enact that rule by increasing their influence over
neurons regulating the bladder.
Moreover, the frontal mantra of “self-discipline is good” when
cookies beckon is also invoked when economizing to increase retirement
savings. Frontal cortical neurons are generalists, with broad patterns of
projections, which makes for more work.43
All this takes energy, and when it is working hard, the frontal cortex
has an extremely high metabolic rate and rates of activation of genes
related to energy production.44 Willpower is more than just a metaphor;
self-control is a finite resource. Frontal neurons are expensive cells, and
expensive cells are vulnerable cells. Consistent with that, the frontal
cortex is atypically vulnerable to various neurological insults.
Pertinent to this is the concept of “cognitive load.” Make the frontal
cortex work hard—a tough working-memory task, regulating social
behavior, or making numerous decisions while shopping. Immediately
afterward performance on a different frontally dependent task declines.45
Likewise during multitasking, where PFC neurons simultaneously
participate in multiple activated circuits.
Importantly, increase cognitive load on the frontal cortex, and
afterward subjects become less prosocial*—less charitable or helpful,
more likely to lie.46 Or increase cognitive load with a task requiring
difficult emotional regulation, and subjects cheat more on their diets
afterward.*47
So the frontal cortex is awash in Calvinist self-discipline, a superego
with its nose to the grindstone.48 But as an important qualifier, soon after
we’re potty-trained, doing the harder thing with our bladder muscles
becomes automatic. Likewise with other initially demanding frontal
tasks. For example, you’re learning a piece of music on the piano, there’s
a difficult trill, and each time as you approach it, you think, “Here it
comes. Remember, tuck my elbow in, lead with my thumb.” A classic
working-memory task. And then one day you realize that you’re five
measures past the trill, it went fine, and you didn’t have to think about it.
And that’s when doing the trill is transferred from the frontal cortex to
more reflexive brain regions (e.g., the cerebellum). This transition to
automaticity also happens when you get good at a sport, when
metaphorically your body knows what to do without your thinking about
it.
53