Open-ended play. Two individuals play the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
knowing that after a single round, they’ll never meet again. Rationality
decrees that you defect; there’ll never be a chance to catch up if you fall
behind in that first round. What about two rounds? Well, the second
round requires noncooperation for the same reasons the single-round
game does. In other words, it never makes sense to cooperate in the final
round. Thus, round 2 behavior determined, the game defaults to a single-
round game—where the rational strategy is to defect. Three rounds? The
same. In other words, playing for a known number of rounds biases
against cooperation, and the more rational the players, the more they
foresee this. It’s open-ended play that fosters cooperation—an unknown
number of rounds, producing the shadow of the future, where retribution
is possible and the advantages of sustained mutual cooperation
accumulate with increasing numbers of interactions.25
Multiple games. Two individuals play two games against each other
simultaneously (alternating rounds between the two) where one game
has a much lower threshold for establishing cooperation than the other.
Once cooperation is established in that less cutthroat game, there is
psychological spillover of cooperation into the other. This is why
managers of tense, competitive offices bring in soothing outsiders to lead
trust games, hoping that the low-threshold demands for trust there will
spill over into work life.
Open-book play. This is where the other player can see if you’ve been a
jerk to people in the past. Reputation is a powerful facilitator of
cooperation. That’s what a moralizing god is about—the book whose
play is eternally open. As we saw in chapter 9, everyone from hunter-
gatherers to urbanites gossip, doing so to open reputation books wider.26
Open-book play mediates a uniquely sophisticated type of human
cooperation, namely “indirect reciprocity.” Person A helps person B,
who helps C, who helps D. . . . The reciprocity between two individuals
in a closed interaction is like barter. But indirect, pay-it-forward
reciprocity is like money, where the common currency is reputation.27
Punishment
Other animals don’t have reputations or ponder whether their
interactions are open-ended. However, punishment to promote
634