optimistic conviction that God is on your side to the tendency of military
strategists to overestimate their side’s capabilities and underestimate
those of the opposition—“piece of cake, full steam ahead” becomes the
logical conclusion.42
A final domain of irrationality that must be recognized concerns
chapter 15’s “sacred values,” where purely symbolic acts can count for
more than hard-nosed material concessions. Rationality may be key to
establishing peace, but the irrational importance of sacred values is key
to establishing lasting peace.
Our Incompetence at and Aversion to Killing
Video cameras are sufficiently ubiquitous these days to make
“privacy” a threatened phenomenon. One consequence of such ubiquity
is that scientists can be voyeuristic in new ways. Which has produced an
interesting finding.
It concerns riots in soccer stadiums—“football hooliganism,” battles
between ethnic or nationalist groups, partisans of each team, or often
right-wing skinheads going at it. Footage of such events shows that few
people actually fight. Most are on the sidelines watching or running
around like agitated, headless chickens. Of those who fight, most throw
an ineffectual punch or two before discovering that punching makes your
hand hurt. The actual fighters are a tiny subset. As stated by one
researcher, “humans are bad at [close-range, hand-to-hand] violence,
even if civilization makes us a bit better at it.”43
Even more interesting is the evidence of our strong inhibitions
against doing grievous harm to someone up close.
The definitive exploration of this is the 1995 book On Killing: The
Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War and Society, by David
Grossman, a professor of military science and retired U.S. Army
colonel.44
He frames the book around something noted after the Battle of
Gettysburg. Of the almost 27,000 single-load muskets recovered from
the field, almost 24,000 of them were loaded and unfired; 12,000 were
loaded multiple times, 6,000 loaded three to ten times. Lots of soldiers
were standing there thinking, “I’m going to shoot soon, yes I am, hmm,
maybe I should reload my rifle first.” These weapons were recovered
643