And we have language, that extraordinary means of manipulating the
distance between a message and its meaning.
Humans also excel at lying because our cognitive skills allow us to
do something beyond the means of any perfidious gelada baboon—we
can finesse the truth.
A cool study shows our propensity for this. To simplify: A subject
would roll a die, with different results yielding different monetary
rewards. The rolls were made in private, with the subject reporting the
outcome—an opportunity to cheat.
Given chance and enough rolls, if everyone was honest, each number
would be reported about one sixth of the time. If everyone always lied
for maximal gain, all rolls would supposedly have produced the highest-
paying number.
There was lots of lying. Subjects were over 2,500 college students
from twenty-three countries, and higher rates of corruption, tax evasion,
and political fraud in a subject’s country predicted higher rates of lying.
This is no surprise, after chapter 9’s demonstration that high rates of rule
violations in a community decrease social capital, which then fuels
individual antisocial behavior.
What was most interesting was that across all the cultures, lying was
of a particular type. Subjects actually rolled a die twice, and only the first
roll counted (the second, they were told, tested whether the die was
“working properly”). The lying showed a pattern that, based on prior
work, could be explained by only one thing—people rarely made up a
high-paying number. Instead they simply reported the higher roll of the
two.
You can practically hear the rationalizing. “Darn, my first roll was a
1 [a bad outcome], my second a 4 [better]. Hey, rolls are random; it
could just as readily have been 4 as a 1, so . . . let’s just say I rolled a 4.
That’s not really cheating.”
In other words, lying most often included rationalizing that made it
feel less dishonest—not going whole hog for that filthy lucre, so that
your actions feel like only slightly malodorous untruthiness.
When we are lying, naturally, regions involved in Theory of Mind
are involved, particularly with circumstances of strategic social
deception. Moreover, the dlPFC and related frontal regions are central to
a neural circuit of deception. And then insight grinds to a halt.38
513