and these androgenized females were as interested as control females in
infants. Thus, testosterone has prenatal organizational effects on some
but not all behaviors.
In further studies, many carried out by Goy’s student Kim Wallen of
Emory University, pregnant females received lower doses of
testosterone, and only in the last trimester.67 This produced daughters
with normal genitalia but masculinized behavior. The authors noted the
relevance of this to transgender individuals—the external appearance of
one sex but the brain, if you will, of the other.*
And Us
Initially it seemed clear that prenatal testosterone exposure is also
responsible for male aggression in humans. This was based on studies of
a rare disorder, congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). An enzyme in the
adrenal glands has a mutation, and instead of making glucocorticoids,
they make testosterone and other androgens, starting during fetal life.
The lack of glucocorticoids causes serious metabolic problems
requiring replacement hormones. And what about the excessive
androgens in CAH girls (who are typically born with ambiguous genitals
and are infertile as adults)?
In the 1950s psychologist John Money of Johns Hopkins University
reported that CAH girls had pathologically high levels of male-typical
behaviors, a paucity of female-typical ones, and elevated IQ.
That sure stopped everyone in their tracks. But the research had some
problems. First, the IQ finding was spurious—parents willing to enroll
their CAH child in these studies averaged higher levels of education than
did controls. And the gender-typical behaviors? “Normal” was judged by
1950s Ozzie and Harriet standards—CAH girls were pathologically
interested in having careers and disinterested in having babies.
Oops, back to the drawing board. Careful contemporary CAH
research has been conducted by Melissa Hines of the University of
Cambridge.68 When compared with non-CAH girls, CAH girls do more
rough-and-tumble play, fighting, and physical aggression. Moreover,
they prefer “masculine” toys over dolls. As adults they score lower on
measures of tenderness and higher in aggressiveness and self-report
217