price; if it was less than what they were willing to spend, there was
activation of the emotional vmPFC; more expensive, and there’d be
activation of that disgust-related insular cortex. Combine all the
neuroimaging data, and you could predict whether the person would buy
the item.
Thus, in typical mammals the dopamine system codes in a scale-free
manner over a wide range of experience for both good and bad surprises
and is constantly habituating to yesterday’s news. But humans have
something in addition, namely that we invent pleasures far more intense
than anything offered by the natural world.
Once, during a concert of cathedral organ music, as I sat getting
gooseflesh amid that tsunami of sound, I was struck with a thought: for a
medieval peasant, this must have been the loudest human-made sound
they ever experienced, awe-inspiring in now-unimaginable ways. No
wonder they signed up for the religion being proffered. And now we are
constantly pummeled with sounds that dwarf quaint organs. Once,
hunter-gatherers might chance upon honey from a beehive and thus
briefly satisfy a hardwired food craving. And now we have hundreds of
carefully designed commercial foods that supply a burst of sensation
unmatched by some lowly natural food. Once, we had lives that, amid
considerable privation, also offered numerous subtle, hard-won
pleasures. And now we have drugs that cause spasms of pleasure and
dopamine release a thousandfold higher than anything stimulated in our
old drug-free world.
An emptiness comes from this combination of over-the-top
nonnatural sources of reward and the inevitability of habituation; this is
because unnaturally strong explosions of synthetic experience and
sensation and pleasure evoke unnaturally strong degrees of habituation.90
This has two consequences. First, soon we barely notice the fleeting
whispers of pleasure caused by leaves in autumn, or by the lingering
glance of the right person, or by the promise of reward following a
difficult, worthy task. And the other consequence is that we eventually
habituate to even those artificial deluges of intensity. If we were
designed by engineers, as we consumed more, we’d desire less. But our
frequent human tragedy is that the more we consume, the hungrier we
get. More and faster and stronger. What was an unexpected pleasure
yesterday is what we feel entitled to today, and what won’t be enough
tomorrow.
71