Though we derive subliminal information from bodily cues, such as
posture, we get the most information from faces.19 Why else evolve the
fusiform? The shape of women’s faces changes subtly during their
ovulatory cycle, and men prefer female faces at the time of ovulation.
Subjects guess political affiliation or religion at above-chance levels just
by looking at faces. And for the same transgression, people who look
embarrassed—blushing, eyes averted, face angled downward and to the
side—are more readily forgiven.
Eyes give the most information.20 Take pictures of two faces with
different emotions, and switch different facial parts between the two with
cutting and pasting. What emotion is detected? The one in the eyes.*21
Eyes often have an implicit censorious power.22 Post a large picture
of a pair of eyes at a bus stop (versus a picture of flowers), and people
become more likely to clean up litter. Post a picture of eyes in a
workplace coffee room, and the money paid on the honor system triples.
Show a pair of eyes on a computer screen and people become more
generous in online economic games.
Subliminal auditory cues also alter behavior.23 Back to amygdaloid
activation in whites subliminally viewing black faces. Chad Forbes of
the University of Delaware shows that the amygdala activation increases
if loud rap music—a genre typically associated more with African
Americans than with whites—plays in the background. The opposite
occurs when evoking negative white stereotypes with death metal music
blaring.
Another example of auditory cuing explains a thoroughly poignant
anecdote told by my Stanford colleague Claude Steele, who has done
seminal research on stereotyping.24 Steele recounts how an African
American male grad student of his, knowing the stereotypes that a young
black man evokes on the genteel streets of Palo Alto, whistled Vivaldi
when walking home at night, hoping to evoke instead “Hey, that’s not
Snoop Dogg. That’s a dead white male composer [exhale].”
No discussion of subliminal sensory cuing is complete without
considering olfaction, a subject marketing people have salivated over
since we were projected to watch Smell-O-Vision someday. The human
olfactory system is atrophied; roughly 40 percent of a rat’s brain is
devoted to olfactory processing, versus 3 percent in us. Nonetheless, we
still have unconscious olfactory lives, and as in rodents, our olfactory
system sends more direct projections to the limbic system than other
89