sensory systems. As noted, rodent pheromones carry information about
sex, age, reproductive status, health, and genetic makeup, and they alter
physiology and behavior. Similar, if milder, versions of the same are
reported in some (but not all) studies of humans, ranging from the
Wellesley effect, discussed in the introduction, to heterosexual women
preferring the smell of high-testosterone men.
Importantly, pheromones signal fear. In one study researchers got
armpit swabs from volunteers under two conditions—either after
contentedly sweating during a comfortable run, or after sweating in
terror during their first tandem skydive (note—in tandem skydives
you’re yoked to the instructor, who does the physical work; so if you’re
sweating, it’s from panic, not physical effort). Subjects sniffed each type
of sweat and couldn’t consciously distinguish between them. However,
sniffing terrified sweat (but not contented sweat) caused amygdaloid
activation, a bigger startle response, improved detection of subliminal
angry faces, and increased odds of interpreting an ambiguous face as
looking fearful. If people around you smell scared, your brain tilts
toward concluding that you are too.25
Finally, nonpheromonal odors influence us as well. As we’ll see in
chapter 12, if people sit in a room with smelly garbage, they become
more conservative about social issues (e.g., gay marriage) without
changing their opinions about, say, foreign policy or economics.
Interoceptive Information
In addition to information about the outside world, our brains
constantly receive “interoceptive” information about the body’s internal
state. You feel hungry, your back aches, your gassy intestine twinges,
your big toe itches. And such interoceptive information influences our
behavior as well.
This brings us to the time-honored James-Lange theory, named for
William James, a grand mufti in the history of psychology, and an
obscure Danish physician, Carl Lange. In the 1880s they independently
concocted the same screwy idea. How do your feelings and your body’s
automatic (i.e., “autonomic”) function interact? It seems obvious—a lion
chases you, you feel terrified, and thus your heart speeds up. James and
Lange suggested the opposite: you subliminally note the lion, speeding
up your heart; then your conscious brain gets this interoceptive
90