CULTURE, WITH BOTH A BIG AND A
LITTLE C
C
hapter 9 considers the effects of culture on our best and worst
behaviors. We now preview that chapter, focusing on two facts—
childhood is when culture is inculcated, and parents mediate that process.
There is huge cultural variability in how childhood is experienced—
how long and often kids are nursed; how often they are in contact with
parents and other adults; how often they’re spoken to; how long they cry
before someone responds; at what age they sleep alone.
Considering cross-cultural child rearing often brings out the most
invidious and neurotic in parents—do other cultures do a better job at it?
There must be the perfect combo out there, a mixture of the Kwakiutl
baby diet, the Trobriand sleeping program, and the Ituri approach to
watching Baby Mozart videos. But there is no anthropological ideal of
child rearing. Cultures (starting with parents) raise children to become
adults who behave in the ways valued by that culture, a point
emphasized by the anthropologist Meredith Small of Cornell
University.47
We begin with parenting style, a child’s first encounter with cultural
values. Interestingly, the most influential typology of parenting style,
writ small, grew from thinking about cultural styles, writ large.
Amid the post–World War II ruins, scholars tried to understand
where Hitler, Franco, Mussolini, Tojo, and their minions came from.
What are the roots of fascism? Two particularly influential scholars were
refugees from Hitler, namely Hannah Arendt (with her 1951 book The
Origins of Totalitarianism) and Theodor Adorno (with the 1950 book
The Authoritarian Personality, coauthored with Else Frenkel-Brunswik,
Daniel Levinson, and Nevitt Sanford). Adorno in particular explored the
personality traits of fascists, including extreme conformity, submission to
and belief in authority, aggressiveness, and hostility toward
intellectualism and introspection—traits typically rooted in childhood.48
This influenced the Berkeley psychologist Diana Baumrind, who in
the 1960s identified three key parenting styles (in work since replicated
203