controversial, with conferences picketed and talks disrupted, with
zoologists guarded by police at lectures, all sorts of outlandish things. On
one storied occasion, E. O. Wilson was physically attacked while giving
a talk.* Anthropology departments split in two, collegial relationships
were destroyed. This was particularly so at Harvard, where many of the
principals could be found—Wilson, Gould, Lewontin, Trivers, Hrdy, the
primatologist Irven DeVore, the geneticist Jonathan Beckwith.
Things were so febrile because sociobiology was accused of using
biology to justify the status quo—conservative social Darwinism that
implied that if societies are filled with violence, unequal distribution of
resources, capitalistic stratification, male dominance, xenophobia, and so
on, these things are in our nature and probably evolved for good reasons.
The critics used the “is versus ought” contrast, saying, “Sociobiologists
imply that when an unfair feature of life is the case, it is because it ought
to be.” And the sociobiologists responded by flipping is/ought around:
“We agree that life ought to be fair, but nonetheless, this is reality.
Saying that we advocate something just because we report it is like
saying oncologists advocate cancer.”
The conflict had a personal tinge. This was because by chance (or
not, depending on your viewpoint), that first generation of American
sociobiologists were all white Southerners—Wilson, Trivers,* DeVore,
Hrdy; in contrast, the first generation of its loudest critics were all
Northeastern, urban, Jewish leftists—Harvard’s Gould, Lewontin,
Beckwith, Ruth Hubbard, Princeton’s Leon Kamin, and MIT’s Noam
Chomsky. You can see how the “there’s a hidden agenda here” charge
arose from both sides.*
It’s easy to see how punctuated equilibrium generated similar
ideological battles, given its premise that evolution is mostly about long
periods of stasis pierced by revolutionary upheaval. In their original
publication, Gould and Eldredge asserted that the law of nature “holds
that a new quality emerges in a leap as the slow accumulation of
quantitative changes, long resisted by a stable system, finally forces it
rapidly from one state into another.” This was a bold assertion that the
heuristic of dialectical materialism not only extends beyond the
economic world into the naturalistic one, but is ontologically rooted in
the essential sameness of both worlds’ dynamic of resolution of
irresolvable contradictions.* It is Marx and Engels as trilobite and snail.*
387