Broken-window thinking shaped Rudy Giuliani’s mayoralty in the
1990s, when New York was turning into a Hieronymus Bosch painting.
Police commissioner William Bratton instituted a zero-tolerance policy
toward minor infractions—targeting subway fare evaders, graffiti artists,
vandals, beggars, and the city’s maddening infestation of squeegee men.
Which was followed by a steep drop in rates of serious crime. Similar
results occurred elsewhere; in Lowell, Massachusetts, zero-tolerance
measures were experimentally applied in only one part of the city;
serious crime dropped only in that area. Critics questioned whether the
benefits of broken-window policing were inflated, given that the
approach was tested when crime was already declining throughout the
United States (in other words, in contrast to the commendable Lowell
example, studies often lacked control groups).
In a test of the theory, Kees Keizer of the University of Groningen in
the Netherlands asked whether cues of one type of norm violation made
people prone to violating other norms.39 When bicycles were chained to
a fence (despite a sign forbidding it), people were more likely to take a
shortcut through a gap in the fence (despite a sign forbidding it); people
littered more when walls were graffitied; people were more likely to
steal a five-euro note when litter was strewn around. These were big
effects, with doubling rates of crummy behaviors. A norm violation
increasing the odds of that same norm being violated is a conscious
process. But when the sound of fireworks makes someone more likely to
litter, more unconscious processes are at work.
A Wonderfully Complicating Piece of the Story
We’ve now seen how sensory and interoceptive information
influence the brain to produce a behavior within seconds to minutes. But
as a complication, the brain can alter the sensitivity of those sensory
modalities, making some stimuli more influential.
As an obvious one, dogs prick up their ears when they’re alert—the
brain has stimulated ear muscles in a way that enables the ears to more
easily detect sounds, which then influences the brain.40 During acute
stress, all of our sensory systems become more sensitive. More
selectively, if you’re hungry, you become more sensitive to the smell of
food. How does something like this work? A priori, it seems as if all
95