Neurobiologists Take Notice
Things became interesting with the discovery that those
hypothalamic neurons that made oxytocin and vasopressin also sent
projections throughout the brain, including the dopamine-related ventral
tegmentum and nucleus accumbens, hippocampus, amygdala, and frontal
cortex, all regions with ample levels of receptors for the hormones.
Moreover, oxytocin and vasopressin turned out to be synthesized and
secreted elsewhere in the brain. These two boring, classical peripheral
hormones affected brain function and behavior. They started being called
“neuropeptides”—neuroactive messengers with a peptide structure—
which is a fancy way of saying they are small proteins (and, to avoid
writing “oxytocin and vasopressin” endlessly, I will refer to them as
neuropeptides; note though that there are other neuropeptides).
The initial findings about their behavioral effects made sense.22
Oxytocin prepares the body of a female mammal for birth and lactation;
logically, oxytocin also facilitates maternal behavior. The brain boosts
oxytocin production when a female rat gives birth, thanks to a
hypothalamic circuit with markedly different functions in females and
males. Moreover, the ventral tegmentum increases its sensitivity to the
neuropeptide by increasing levels of oxytocin receptors. Infuse oxytocin
into the brain of a virgin rat, and she’ll act maternally—retrieving,
grooming, and licking pups. Block the actions of oxytocin in a rodent
mother,*23 and she’ll stop maternal behaviors, including nursing.
Oxytocin works in the olfactory system, helping a new mom learn the
smell of her offspring. Meanwhile, vasopressin has similar but milder
effects.
Soon other species were heard from. Oxytocin lets sheep learn the
smell of their offspring and facilitates female monkeys grooming their
offspring. Spray oxytocin up a woman’s nose (a way to get the
neuropeptide past the blood-brain barrier and into the brain), and she’ll
find babies to look more appealing. Moreover, women with variants of
genes that produce higher levels of oxytocin or oxytocin receptors
average higher levels of touching their infants and more synchronized
gazing with them.
So oxytocin is central to female mammals nursing, wanting to nurse
their child, and remembering which one is their child. Males then got
into the act, as vasopressin plays a role in paternal behavior. A female
107