CONTEXT
S
o social intuitions can have large, useful roles in moral decision
making. Should we now debate whether reasoning or intuition is
more important? This is silly, not least of all because there is
considerable overlap between the two. Consider, for example, protesters
shutting down a capital to highlight income inequity. This could be
framed as the Kohlbergian reasoning of people in a postconventional
stage. But it could also be framed à la Haidt in a social intuitionist way—
these are people who resonate more with moral intuitions about fairness
than with respect for authority.
More interesting than squabbling about the relative importance of
reasoning and intuition are two related questions: What circumstances
bias toward emphasizing one over the other? Can the differing emphases
produce different decisions?
As we’ve seen, then–graduate student Josh Greene and colleagues
helped jump-start “neuroethics” by exploring these questions using the
poster child of “Do the ends justify the means?” philosophizing, namely
the runaway trolley problem. A trolley’s brake has failed, and it is
hurtling down the tracks and will hit and kill five people. Is it okay to do
something that saves the five but kills someone else in the process?
People have pondered this since Aristotle took his first trolley ride;*
Greene et al. added neuroscience. Subjects were neuroimaged while
pondering trolley ethics. Crucially, they considered two scenarios.
Scenario 1: Here comes the trolley; five people are goners. Would you
pull a lever that diverts the trolley onto a different track, where it will hit
and kill someone (the original scenario)? Scenario 2: Same circumstance.
Would you push the person onto the tracks to stop the trolley?19
By now I bet readers can predict which brain region(s) activates in
each circumstance. Contemplate pulling the lever, and dlPFC activity
predominates, the detached, cerebral profile of moral reasoning.
Contemplate consigning the person to death by pushing them, and it’s
vmPFC (and amygdala), the visceral profile of moral intuition.
Would you pull the lever? Consistently, 60 to 70 percent of people,
with their dlPFCs churning away, say yes to this utilitarian solution—kill
489