THE DEMISE OF GROUP SELECTION
W
e start by grappling with an entrenched misconception about the
evolution of behavior. This is because Americans were taught
about the subject in the 1960s by Marlin Perkins on the TV program
Mutual of Omaha’s Wild Kingdom.
It was great. Perkins would host. Jim, his sidekick, did dangerous
things with snakes. And there were always seamless segues from the
program to ads from Mutual of Omaha—“Just as lions mate for hours,
you’ll want fire insurance for your home.”
Unfortunately, Perkins espoused wildly wrong evolutionary thinking.
Here’s how it looked on the program: It’s dawn on the savanna; there’s a
herd of wildebeest on a river’s edge. The grass is greener on the other
side, and everyone wants some, but the river teems with predatory
crocodiles. The wildebeest are hemming and hawing in agitation when
suddenly an elderly wildebeest pushes to the front, says, “I sacrifice
myself for you, my children,” and leaps in. And while the crocs are busy
with him, the other wildebeest cross the river.
Why would the old wildebeest do that? Marlin Perkins would answer
with patrician authority: because animals behave For the Good of the
Species.
Yes, behavior evolves by “group selection” for the good of the
species. This idea was championed in the early 1960s by V. C. Wynne-
Edwards, whose wrongness made him modern evolutionary biology’s
Lamarck.*5
Animals don’t behave for the good of the species. But what about
that wildebeest? Look closely and you’ll see what really happens. Why
did he wind up saving the day? Because he was old and weak. “Good of
the species” my keister. They pushed the old guy in.
Group selection was done in by theoretical and empirical studies
showing patterns of behavior incompatible with it. Key work was done
by two gods of evolutionary biology, George Williams of SUNY Stony
Brook and Oxford’s Bill (“W.D.”) Hamilton.6 Consider “eusocial
insects,” where most individuals are nonreproductive workers. Why
forgo reproduction to aid the queen? Group selection, obviously.
335