What about variability in male reproductive success? In one species 5
percent of the males do nearly all the mating; in the other, all males
reproduce a few times. The former describes species B—that’s what all
the rank competition is about—the latter, species A.
Next, in one species, if a male mates with a female and she
conceives, he’ll do a ton of child care. In contrast, no such male
“parental investment” is seen in the other species. No-brainer: the former
describes species A; the few species B males who father most of the kids
sure aren’t doing child care.
One species has a tendency to twin, the other not. Easy—the
twinning is in species A, with two sets of parental hands available.
How picky are males about whom they mate with? In species B,
males mate with anyone, anywhere, anytime—it only costs the price of
some sperm. In contrast, males of species A, with its rule of “You get her
pregnant, you do child care,” are more selective. Related to that, which
species forms stable pair-bonds? Species A, of course.
After correcting for body size, which species’ males have bigger
testes and higher sperm count? It’s species B, ever prepared for mating,
should the opportunity arise.
What do females look for in a potential mate? Species B females get
nothing from a male except genes, so they should be good ones. This
helps explain the flamboyant secondary sexual characteristics of males
—“If I can afford to waste all this energy on muscle plus these ridiculous
neon antlers, I must be in great shape, with the sorts of genes you’d want
in your kids.” In contrast, species A females look for stable, affiliative
behavior and good parenting skills in males. This is seen in bird species
with this pattern, where males display parenting expertise during
courtship—symbolically feeding the female with worms, proof that he’d
be a competent worm winner. Related to that, among bird versions of
species A and B, in which is a female more likely to abandon her
offspring, passing on more copies of her genes by breeding with another
male? Species A, where you see “cuckoldry”—because the male is going
to stick there, caring for the kids.
Related to that, in species A, females compete aggressively to pair-
bond with a particularly desirable (i.e., paternal) male. In contrast,
species B females don’t need to compete, since all they get from males is
sperm, and there’s enough to go around from desirable males.
359