This last study raises the question of what occurs in the brain under
these circumstances. Our usual cast of brain regions pops up in
informative ways.
The influential “social identity theory” posits that our concept of who
we are is heavily shaped by social context—by the groups we do or don’t
identify with.*57 In that view, conformity and obedience, while certainly
about avoiding punishment, are at least as much about the positives of
fitting in. When we imitate someone’s actions, our mesolimbic dopamine
system activates.* When we choose incorrectly in a task, the
dopaminergic decline is less if we made the decision as part of a group
than if we did so as an individual. Belonging is safety.
In numerous studies a subject in a group answers some question,
finds out after that—oh no!—everyone else disagrees, and can then
change their answer.58 No surprise, the discovery that you are out of step
activates the amygdala and insular cortex; the more activation, the
greater your likelihood of changing your mind, and the more persistent
the change (as opposed to the transient change of compliant public
conformity). This is a profoundly social phenomenon—people are more
likely to change their answer if you show them a picture of the person(s)
who disagrees with them.
When you get the news that everyone else disagrees with you, there
is also activation of the (emotional) vmPFC, the anterior cingulate
cortex, and the nucleus accumbens. This is a network mobilized during
reinforcement learning, where you learn to modify your behavior when
there is a mismatch between what you expected to happen and what
actually did. Find out that everyone disagrees with you and this network
activates. What is it basically telling you? Not just that you’re different
from everyone else. That you’re wrong. Being different = being wrong.
The greater the activation of this circuit, the greater the likelihood of
changing answers to conform.59
Like most of the neuroimaging literature, these studies are merely
correlative. Thus, particularly important is a 2011 study that used
transcranial magnetic stimulation techniques to temporarily inactivate
the vmPFC; subjects became less likely to change their answer to
conform.60
Back to the contrast between conforming taking the form of “You
know what, if everyone says they saw B, I guess I did too; whatever” and
its taking the form of “Now that I think about it, I didn’t actually see A; I
459