But the closer to home and the more emotional the scenario, the more
they have problems.
Damasio has produced an influential theory about emotion-laden
decision making, rooted in the philosophies of Hume and William James;
this will soon be discussed.61 Briefly, the frontal cortex runs “as if”
experiments of gut feelings—“How would I feel if this outcome
occurred?”—and makes choices with the answer in mind. Damaging the
vmPFC, thus removing limbic input to the PFC, eliminates gut feelings,
making decisions harder.
Moreover, eventual decisions are highly utilitarian. vmPFC patients
are atypically willing to sacrifice one person, including a family member,
to save five strangers.62 They’re more interested in outcomes than in
their underlying emotional motives, punishing someone who accidentally
kills but not one who tried to kill but failed, because, after all, no one
died in the second case.
It’s Mr. Spock, running on only the dlPFC. Now for a crucial point.
People who dichotomize between thought and emotion often prefer the
former, viewing emotion as suspect. It gums up decision making by
getting sentimental, sings too loudly, dresses flamboyantly, has
unsettling amounts of armpit hair. In this view, get rid of the vmPFC, and
we’d be more rational and function better.
But that’s not the case, as emphasized eloquently by Damasio. People
with vmPFC damage not only have trouble making decisions but also
make bad ones.63 They show poor judgment in choosing friends and
partners and don’t shift behavior based on negative feedback. For
example, consider a gambling task where reward rates for various
strategies change without subjects knowing it, and subjects can shift their
play strategy. Control subjects shift optimally, even if they can’t
verbalize how reward rates have changed. Those with vmPFC damage
don’t, even when they can verbalize. Without a vmPFC, you may know
the meaning of negative feedback, but you don’t know the feeling of it in
your gut and thus don’t shift behavior.
As we saw, without the dlPFC, the metaphorical superego is gone,
resulting in individuals who are now hyperaggressive, hypersexual ids.
But without a vmPFC, behavior is inappropriate in a detached way. This
is the person who, encountering someone after a long time, says, “Hello,
I see you’ve put on some weight.” And when castigated later by their
mortified spouse, they will say with calm puzzlement, “But it’s true.”
59