male-male competition for direct or indirect reproductive access to
females. And then there is the dizzyingly common male violence against
females for coercive sex or as a response to rejection.
So plenty of human behaviors would make sense to a baboon or
elephant seal. But that’s only half the story. Despite Ramses, Ibn Saud,
and Bokassa, numerous people forgo reproducing, often because of
theology or ideology. And an entire sect—the United Society of
Believers in Christ’s Second Appearing, aka the Shakers, will soon be
extinct because of its adherents’ celibacy. And finally, the supposed
selfishness of human genes driving individual selection must
accommodate individuals sacrificing themselves for strangers.
Earlier in the chapter I presented competitive infanticide as stark
evidence of the importance of individual selection. Does anything like
that occur in humans? The psychologists Martin Daly and (the late)
Margo Wilson of McMaster University in Canada looked at patterns of
child abuse and made a striking observation—a child is far more likely to
be abused or killed by a stepparent than by a parent. This is readily
framed as parallel to competitive infanticide.53
This finding, termed the “Cinderella effect,” while embraced by
human sociobiologists, has also been robustly criticized. Some charge
that socioeconomic status was not sufficiently controlled for (homes with
a stepparent, rather than two biological parents, generally have less
income and more economic stress, known causes of displacement
aggression). Others think there’s a detection bias—the same degree of
abuse is more likely to be identified by authorities when it’s committed
by a stepparent. And the finding has been independently replicated in
some but not all studies. I think the jury is still out on the subject.
Kin Selection
Where do humans fit in terms of kin selection? We’ve already seen
examples that fit well—e.g., the fraternal polyandry in Tibet, the
weirdness of women liking the smell of their male cousins, the
universality of nepotism.
Moreover, humans are obsessed with kin relations in culture after
culture, with elaborate systems of kinship terms (just go into a store and
look at the Hallmark cards organized by kinship category—for a sister, a
brother, an uncle, and so on). And in contrast to other primates who
370