(downside: this is also when kids first negatively stereotype categories of
people).
There are also hints of a sense of justice. Preschoolers tend to be
egalitarians (e.g., it’s better that the friend gets a cookie when she does).
But before we get carried away with the generosity of youth, there is
already in-group bias; if the other child is a stranger, there is less
egalitarianism.14
There is also a growing tendency of kids to respond to an injustice,
when someone has been treated unfairly.15 But once again, before getting
carried away with things, it comes with a bias. By ages four through six,
kids in cultures from around the world respond negatively when they are
the ones being shortchanged. It isn’t until ages eight through ten that kids
respond negatively to someone else being treated unfairly. Moreover,
there is considerable cross-cultural variability as to whether that later
stage even emerges. The sense of justice in young kids is a very self-
interested one.
Soon after kids start responding negatively to someone else being
treated unjustly, they begin attempting to rectify previous inequalities
(“He should get more now because he got less before”).16 By
preadolescence, egalitarianism gives way to acceptance of inequality
because of merit or effort or for a greater good (“She should play more
than him; she’s better/worked harder/is more important to the team”).
Some kids even manage self-sacrifice for the greater good (“She should
play more than me; she’s better”).* By adolescence, boys tend to accept
inequality more than girls do, on utilitarian grounds. And both sexes are
acquiescing to inequality as social convention—“Nothing can be done;
that’s the way it is.”
Moral Development
With ToM, perspective taking, nuanced empathy, and a sense of
justice in place, a child can start wrestling with telling right from wrong.
Piaget emphasized how much kids’ play is about working out rules
of appropriate behavior (rules that can differ from those of adults)* and
how this involves stages of increasing complexity. This inspired a
younger psychologist to investigate the topic more rigorously, with
enormously influential consequences.
181