stepping to Jonestown’s wretched obeying the command to kill their
children.
Roots
Conformity and obedience have deep roots, as evidenced by their
presence in other species and in very young humans.
Animal conformity is a type of social learning—a subordinate
primate does not have to be thrashed by some bruiser in order to express
subordination to him; everyone else’s doing so can be sufficient.*51 The
conformity has a familiar human tinge to it. For example, a chimp is
more likely to copy an action if he sees three other individuals do it once
each than if one other individual does it three times.* Moreover, learning
can include “cultural transmission”—in chimps, for example, this
includes learning types of tool construction. Conformity relates to social
and emotional contagion where, say, a primate aggressively targets an
individual just because someone else is already doing so. Such contagion
even works between groups. For example, among marmosets aggression
in a group becomes more likely if aggressive vocalizations are heard
from the neighboring group. Other primates are even subject to the social
contagion of yawning.*52
My favorite example of nonhuman conformity is so familiar that it
could come right out of high school. A male grouse courts a female who,
alas, doesn’t feel magic in the air and rebuffs him. The researchers then
make him seem like the hottest stud on the prairie—by surrounding him
with some rapt, stuffed female grouse. Soon the reluctant maiden is all
over him, pushing her statuesque rivals aside.53
An even clearer demonstration of animal conformity was shown in a
beautiful study of chimpanzees by Frans de Waal. In each of two groups
the alpha female was separated from the rest and shown how to open a
puzzle box containing food. Crucially, the two were shown different,
equally difficult ways of doing it. Once the females had mastered their
approaches, the chimps in each group got to watch their alpha female
strut her stuff repeatedly with the puzzle box. Finally everyone got
access to the puzzle box and promptly copied their alpha’s technique.54
Thus this is a cool demonstration of the spread of cultural
information. But something even more interesting happened. A chimp in
457