wouldn’t have had a clue. And yet there we were, one millisecond
postchads, with each party passionately explaining why the view of the
opposing Thems threatened Mom, apple pie, and the legacy of the
Alamo.
The “confirmation biases” used to rationalize and justify automatic
Them-ing are numerous—remembering supportive better than opposing
evidence; testing things in ways that can support but not negate your
hypothesis; skeptically probing outcomes you don’t like more than ones
you do.
Moreover, manipulating implicit Them-ing alters justification
processes. In one study Scottish students read about a game where
Scottish participants either did or didn’t treat English participants
unfairly. Students who read about Scots being prejudicial became more
positive in their stereotypes about Scots and more negative about Brits—
justifying the bias by the Scottish participants.41
Our cognitions run to catch up with our affective selves, searching
for the minute factoid or plausible fabrication that explains why we hate
Them.42
Individual Intergroup Interactions Versus Group
Intergroup Interactions
Thus, we tend to think of Us as noble, loyal, and composed of
distinctive individuals whose failings are due to circumstance. Thems, in
contrast, seem disgusting, ridiculous, simple, homogeneous,
undifferentiated, and interchangeable. All frequently backed up by
rationalizations for our intuitions.
That is a picture of an individual navigating Us/Them in his mind.
Interactions between groups tend to be more competitive and aggressive
than are interactions between individual Us-es and Thems. In the words
of Reinhold Niebuhr, writing during World War II, “The group is more
arrogant, hypocritical, self-centered and more ruthless in the pursuit of
its ends than the individual.”43
There is often an inverse relationship between levels of intragroup
and intergroup aggression. In other words, groups with highly hostile
interactions with neighbors tend to have minimal internal conflict. Or, to
406