But there is a big problem. I don’t believe in souls or evil, think that
the word “wicked” is most pertinent to a musical, and doubt that
punishment should be relevant to criminal justice. But there’s a problem
with that, in turn—I sure feel like some people should be put to death,
yet I oppose the death penalty. I’ve enjoyed plenty of violent, schlocky
movies, despite being in favor of strict gun control. And I sure had fun
when, at some kid’s birthday party and against various unformed
principles in my mind, I played laser tag, shooting at strangers from
hiding places (fun, that is, until some pimply kid zapped me, like, a
million times and then snickered at me, which made me feel insecure and
unmanly). Yet at the same time, I know most of the lyrics to “Down by
the Riverside” (“ain’t gonna study war no more”) plus when you’re
supposed to clap your hands.
In other words, I have a confused array of feelings and thoughts
about violence, aggression, and competition. Just like most humans.
To preach from an obvious soapbox, our species has problems with
violence. We have the means to create thousands of mushroom clouds;
shower heads and subway ventilation systems have carried poison gas,
letters have carried anthrax, passenger planes have become weapons;
mass rapes can constitute a military strategy; bombs go off in markets,
schoolchildren with guns massacre other children; there are
neighborhoods where everyone from pizza delivery guys to firefighters
fears for their safety. And there are the subtler versions of violence—say,
a childhood of growing up abused, or the effects on a minority people
when the symbols of the majority shout domination and menace. We are
always shadowed by the threat of other humans harming us.
If that were solely the way things are, violence would be an easy
problem to approach intellectually. AIDS—unambiguously bad news—
eradicate. Alzheimer’s disease—same thing. Schizophrenia, cancer,
malnutrition, flesh-eating bacteria, global warming, comets hitting earth
—ditto.
The problem, though, is that violence doesn’t go on that list.
Sometimes we have no problem with it at all.
This is a central point of this book—we don’t hate violence. We hate
and fear the wrong kind of violence, violence in the wrong context.
Because violence in the right context is different. We pay good money to
watch it in a stadium, we teach our kids to fight back, we feel proud
when, in creaky middle age, we manage a dirty hip-check in a weekend
8