cooperation occurs in numerous species—this is shown when a male
baboon who is being an aggressive brute to a female is chased out of the
troop for a while by the victim and her relatives. Punishment can
strongly facilitate cooperation, but its implementation is potentially
double-edged in humans.
All cultures show some degree of willingness to pay a cost to punish
norm violators, and high degrees of willingness correlate with high
levels of prosociality. One study examined rural Ethiopians who
subsisted on selling charcoal made from wood from local forests—a
classic tragedy of the commons scenario: no one is likely to
spontaneously limit logging to keep the forest healthy. The study showed
that villages with high average levels of willingness to administer costly
punishment in an economic game were the ones with the most patrols to
prevent overcutting of trees and the healthiest forests. And as seen in
chapter 9, cultures with gods who punish norm violations are atypically
prosocial.28
A complication in costly punishment is the cost—the danger that the
costs of monitoring for and punishing violations may outweigh the
benefits of the cooperation induced. A solution is to reduce surveillance
after long stretches of cooperation—in other words, to trust. For
example, probably very few Amish purchase costly retinal-scanner home
security systems.29
Another complication concerns who does the punishing. In other
species it is usually the victim, the second party. By definition,
punishment in two-person games in humans (e.g., the Ultimatum Game)
is always by the second party. In that setting the punisher forgoes the
measly share offered, (a) in the hopes of deriving visceral satisfaction
from depriving the first party of their larger share (and, as seen in the last
chapter, that is a major motivator of punishment, fueled by the amygdala
and insula); (b) in an effort to shape the first party into making fairer
offers to the second party in the future; or (c) as an altruistic act, hoping
to shape the first party into being more decent to whomever they play
next. This is complex for second parties, balancing costs and benefits,
heart and mind, birds in the hand and in the bush. It might also result in
the first party being offended by the rejection and becoming even less
cooperative thereafter—an outcome in some game scenarios.30
Humans uniquely and very effectively boost cooperation through
third-party punishment meted out by objective outsiders. However, such
635