neotenized wolf than to another human. Why else act that way? “I’ll
gladly lay down my life for eight cousins or my awesome labradoodle,
Sadie.”
—
Human irrationality in distinguishing kin from nonkin takes us to the
heart of our best and worst behaviors. This is because of something
crucial—we can be manipulated into feeling more or less related to
someone than we actually are. When it is the former, wonderful things
happen—we adopt, donate, advocate for, empathize with. We look at
someone very different from us and see similarities. It is called
pseudokinship. And the converse? One of the tools of the propagandist
and ideologue drumming up hatred of the out-group—blacks, Jews,
Muslims, Tutsis, Armenians, Roma—is to characterize them as animals,
vermin, cockroaches, pathogens. So different that they hardly count as
human. It’s called pseudospeciation, and as will be seen in chapter 15, it
underpins many of our worst moments.
Reciprocal Altruism and Neo–Group Selectionism
There’s not much to say here other than that this is the most
interesting stuff in the chapter. When Axelrod got his round-robin
tournament all fired up, he didn’t canvass, say, fish for their Prisoner’s
Dilemma strategies. He asked humans.
We’re the species with unprecedented cooperation among unrelated
individuals, even total strangers; Dictyostelium colonies are green with
envy at the human ability to do a wave in a football stadium. We work
collectively as hunter-gatherers or as IT execs. Likewise when we go to
war or help disaster victims a world away. We work as teams to hijack
planes and fly them into buildings, or to award a Nobel Peace Prize.
Rules, laws, treaties, penalties, social conscience, an inner voice,
morals, ethics, divine retribution, kindergarten songs about sharing—all
driven by the third leg of the evolution of behavior, namely that it is
evolutionarily advantageous for nonrelatives to cooperate. Sometimes.
One manifestation of this strong human tendency has been
appreciated recently by anthropologists. The standard view of hunter-
gatherers was that their cooperative, egalitarian nature reflected high
degrees of relatedness within groups—i.e., kin selection. The man-the-
374