behavior. Consider pairs of identical twins, sharing 100 percent of their
genes. Suppose one of each pair has schizophrenia; does the twin as
well? If there are any cases where the other twin doesn’t (i.e., where the
“concordance rate” is less than 100 percent), you’ve shown that the
genome and epigenetic profile inherited at birth do not solely determine
the incidence of schizophrenia (in fact the concordance rate is about 50
percent).
But then a more elegant twin approach emerged, involving the key
distinction between identical (monozygotic, or MZ) twins, who share
100 percent of their genes, and fraternal, nonidentical (dizygotic, or DZ)
twins, who, like all other sibling pairs, share 50 percent of their genes.
Compare pairs of MZ twins with same-sex DZ twins. Each pair is the
same age, was raised in the same environment, and shared a fetal
environment; the only difference is the percentage of genes shared.
Examine a trait occurring in one member of the twin pair; is it there in
the other? The logic ran that, if a trait is shared more among MZ than
among DZ twins, that increased degree of sharing reflects the genetic
contribution to the trait.
Another major advance came in the 1960s. Identify individuals
adopted soon after birth. All they share with their biological parents is
genes; all they share with their adoptive parents is environment. Thus, if
adopted individuals share a trait more with their biological than with
their adoptive parents, you’ve uncovered a genetic influence. This
replicates a classic tool in animal studies, namely “cross-fostering”—
switching newborn rat pups between two mothers. The approach was
pioneered in revealing a strong genetic component to schizophrenia.13
Then came the most wonderful, amazing, like, totally awesome thing
ever in behavior genetics, started by Thomas Bouchard of the University
of Minnesota. In 1979 Bouchard found a pair of identical twins who
were—get this—separated at birth and adopted into different homes,
with no knowledge of each other’s existence until being reunited as
adults.14 Identical twins separated at birth are so spectacular and rare that
behavior geneticists swoon over them, want to collect them all. Bouchard
eventually studied more than a hundred such pairs.
The attraction was obvious—same genes, different environments
(and the more different the better); thus, similarities in behavior probably
reflect genetic influences. Here’s an imaginary twin pair that would be
God’s gift to behavior geneticists—identical twin boys separated at birth.
236