influence is often actually mediated via peers. For example, being raised
by a single mother increases the risk of adult antisocial behavior, but not
because of the parenting; instead, because of typically lower income,
kids more likely live in a neighborhood with tough peers. (b) Peers have
impact on linguistic development (e.g., children acquire the accent of
their peers, not their parents). (c) Other young primates are mostly
socialized by peers, not mothers.
The book was controversial (partially because the theme begged to
be distorted—“Psychologist proves that parents don’t matter”), drawing
criticism and acclaim.* As the dust has settled, current opinion tends to
be that peer influences are underappreciated, but parents still are plenty
important, including by influencing what peer groups their kids
experience.
Why are peers so important? Peer interactions teach social
competence—context-dependent behavior, when to be friend or foe,
where you fit in hierarchies. Young organisms utilize the greatest
teaching tool ever to acquire such information—play.52
What is social play in the young? Writ large, it’s an array of
behaviors that train individuals in social competence. Writ medium, it’s
fragments of the real thing, bits and pieces of fixed action patterns, a
chance to safely try out roles and improve motor skills. Writ small and
endocrine, it’s a demonstration that moderate and transient stress
—“stimulation”—is great. Writ small and neurobiological, it’s a tool for
deciding which excess synapses to prune.
The historian Johan Huizinga characterized humans as “Homo
Ludens,” Man the Player, with our structured, rule-bound play—i.e.,
games. Nevertheless, play is universal among socially complex species,
ubiquitous among the young and peaking at puberty, and all play
involves similar behaviors, after some ethological translating (e.g., a
dominant dog signals the benevolence needed to initiate play by
crouching, diminishing herself; translated into baboon, a dominant kid
presents her rear to someone lower ranking).
Play is vital. In order to play, animals forgo foraging, expend
calories, make themselves distracted and conspicuous to predators.
Young organisms squander energy on play during famines. A child
deprived of or disinterested in play rarely has a socially fulfilling adult
life.
205