had been weaned at the same age and lived in the same brand of cage
with the same brand and thickness of sawdust bedding, changed on the
same day of the week. They were handled the same number of times by
humans wearing the same brand of surgical gloves. They were fed the
same food and kept in the same lighting environment at the same
temperature. The environments of these animals could hardly have been
more similar if the three scientists had been identical triplets separated at
birth.
What did they observe? Some gene variants showed massive
gene/environment interactions, with variants having radically different
effects in different labs.
Here’s the sort of data they got: Take a strain called 129/SvEvTac
and a test measuring the effects of cocaine on activity. In Oregon cocaine
increased activity in these mice by 667 centimeters of movement per
fifteen minutes. In Albany, an increase of 701. Those are pretty similar
numbers; good. And in Alberta? More than 5,000. That’s like identical
triplets pole-vaulting, each in a different location; they’ve all had the
same training, equipment, running surface, night’s rest, breakfast, and
brand of underwear. The first two vault 18 feet and 18 feet one inch, and
the third vaults 108 feet.
Maybe the scientists didn’t know what they were doing; maybe the
labs were chaotic. But variability was small within each lab, showing
stable environmental conditions. And crucially, a few variants didn’t
show a gene/environment interaction, producing similar effects in the
three labs.
What does this mean? That most of the gene variants were so
sensitive to environment that gene/environment interactions occurred
even in these obsessively similar lab settings, where incredibly subtle
(and still unidentified) environmental differences made huge differences
in what the gene did.
Citing “gene/environment interactions” is a time-honored genetics
cliché.36 My students roll their eyes when I mention them. I roll my eyes
when I mention them. Eat your vegetables, floss your teeth, remember to
say, “It’s difficult to quantitatively assess the relative contributions of
genes and environment to a particular trait when they interact.” This
suggests a radical conclusion: it’s not meaningful to ask what a gene
does, just what it does in a particular environment. This is summarized
wonderfully by the neurobiologist Donald Hebb: “It is no more
247