The Conscious, Cognitive Level
Various overt strategies have been found to decrease implicit biases.
A classic one is perspective taking, which enhances identification with
Them. For example, in a study concerning age bias, having subjects take
the perspective of older individuals more effectively reduced bias than
merely instructing subjects to inhibit stereotypical thoughts. Another is
to consciously focus on counterstereotypes. In one such study automatic
sexual biases were lessened more when men were instructed to imagine a
strong woman with positive attributes, than when they were instructed to
attempt stereotype suppression. Another strategy is to make implicit
biases explicit—show people evidence of their automatic biases. More to
come concerning these strategies.69
Changing the Rank Ordering of Us/Them
Categories
This refers to the multiple Us/Them dichotomies we carry and the
ease of shifting their priority—shifting automatic categorizing by race to
categorizing by shirt color or manipulating math performance by
emphasizing either gender or ethnicity. Shifting which categorization is
at the forefront isn’t necessarily a great thing and may just constitute six
of one, half a dozen of the other—for example, among European
American men, a photograph of an Asian woman applying makeup
makes gender automaticity stronger than ethnic automaticity, while a
picture of her using chopsticks does the opposite. More effective than
getting people to shift a Them of one category into merely another type
of Them, of course, is to shift the Them to being perceived as an Us—
emphasizing attributes in common.70 Which brings us to . . .
Contact
In the 1950s the psychologist Gordon Allport proposed “contact
theory.”71 Inaccurate version: if you bring Us-es and Thems together
(say, teenagers from two hostile nations brought together in a summer
camp), animosities disappear, similarities become more important than
differences, and everyone becomes an Us. More accurate version: put
421