The closer in proximity the two animals are, the more
likely the one getting cucumber is to go on strike.
Finally, rejection of unfair pay isn’t seen in species that
are solitary (e.g., orangutans) or have minimal social
cooperation (e.g., owl monkeys).
Okay, very impressive—other social species show hints of a sense of
justice, reacting negatively to unequal reward. But this is worlds away
from juries awarding money to plaintiffs harmed by employers. Instead
it’s self-interest—“This isn’t fair; I’m getting screwed.”
How about evidence of a sense of fairness in the treatment of another
individual? Two studies have examined this in a chimp version of the
Ultimatum Game. Recall the human version—in repeated rounds, player
1 in a pair decides how money is divided between the two of them.
Player 2 is powerless in the decision making but, if unhappy with the
split, can refuse, and no one gets any money. In other words, player 2 can
forgo immediate reward to punish selfish player 1. As we saw in chapter
10, Player 2s tend to accept 60:40 splits.
In the chimp version, chimp 1, the proposer, has two tokens. One
indicates that each chimp gets two grapes. The other indicates that the
proposer gets three grapes, the partner only one. The proposer chooses a
token and passes it to chimp 2, who then decides whether to pass the
token to the human grape dispenser. In other words, if chimp 2 thinks
chimp 1 is being unfair, no one gets grapes.
In one such study, Michael Tomasello (a frequent critic of de Waal—
stay tuned) at the Max Planck Institutes in Germany, found no evidence
of chimp fairness—the proposer always chose, and the partner always
accepted unfair splits.15 De Waal and Brosnan did the study in more
ethologically valid conditions and reported something different: proposer
chimps tended toward equitable splits, but if they could give the token
directly to the human (robbing chimp 2 of veto power), they’d favor
unfair splits. So chimps will opt for fairer splits—but only when there is
a downside to being unfair.
Sometimes other primates are fair when it’s at no cost to themselves.
Back to capuchin monkeys. Monkey 1 chooses whether both he and the
other guy get marshmallows or it’s a marshmallow for him and yucky
celery for the other guy. Monkeys tended to choose marshmallows for
the other guy.* Similar “other-regarding preference” was shown with
486