enhance our opinion of Us rather than lessening our opinion of Them. I
guess that’s meager good news—at least we resist thinking that people
who came up heads on the coin toss (in contrast to our admirable tails)
eat their dead.
The power of minimal, arbitrary groupings to elicit Us/Them-ing
recalls “green-beard effects” from chapter 10. Recall how these hover
between prosociality due to kin selection and due to reciprocal altruism
—they require an arbitrary, conspicuous, genetically based trait (e.g., a
green beard) that indicates a tendency to act altruistically toward other
green-bearders—under those conditions, green-bearders flourish.
Us/Them-ing based on minimal shared traits is like psychological
rather than genetic green-beard effects. We feel positive associations
with people who share the most meaningless traits with us.
As a great example, in one study subjects conversed with a
researcher who, unbeknownst to them, did or didn’t mimic their
movements (for example, leg crossing).6 Not only is mimicry pleasing,
activating mesolimbic dopamine, but it also made subjects more likely to
help the researcher, picking up their dropped pen. An unconscious Us-
ness born from someone slouching in a chair like you do.
Thus an invisible strategy becomes yoked to an arbitrary green-beard
marker. What helps define a particular culture? Values, beliefs,
attributions, ideologies. All invisible, until they are yoked with arbitrary
markers such as dress, ornamentation, or regional accent. Consider two
value-laden approaches to what to do to a cow: (A) eat it; (B) worship it.
Two As or two Bs would be more peaceful when sorting out cow options
than an A and B together. What might reliably mark someone who uses
approach A? Maybe a Stetson and cowboy boots. And a B person?
Perhaps a sari or a Nehru jacket. Those markers were initially arbitrary—
nothing about the object called a sari intrinsically suggests a belief that
cows are sacred because a god tends them. And there’s no inevitable link
between carnivory and a Stetson’s shape—it keeps the sun out of your
eyes and off your neck, useful whether you tend cows because you love
steak or because Lord Krishna tended cows. Minimal group studies show
our propensity for generating biased Us/Thems from arbitrary
differences. What we then do is link arbitrary markers to meaningful
differences in values and beliefs.
And then something happens with those arbitrary markers. We (e.g.,
primates, rats, Pavlov’s dogs) can be conditioned to associate something
393