millennia of factors that shaped the evolution of that particular gene.”
And so on.
There are not different disciplinary buckets. Instead, each one is the
end product of all the biological influences that came before it and will
influence all the factors that follow it. Thus, it is impossible to conclude
that a behavior is caused by a gene, a hormone, a childhood trauma,
because the second you invoke one type of explanation, you are de facto
invoking them all. No buckets. A “neurobiological” or “genetic” or
“developmental” explanation for a behavior is just shorthand, an
expository convenience for temporarily approaching the whole
multifactorial arc from a particular perspective.
Pretty impressive, huh? Actually, maybe not. Maybe I’m just
pretentiously saying, “You have to think complexly about complex
things.” Wow, what a revelation. And maybe what I’ve been tacitly
setting up is this full-of-ourselves straw man of “Ooh, we’re going to
think subtly. We won’t get suckered into simplistic answers, not like
those chicken-crossing-the-road neurochemists and chicken evolutionary
biologists and chicken psychoanalysts, all living in their own limited
categorical buckets.”
Obviously, scientists aren’t like that. They’re smart. They understand
that they need to take lots of angles into account. Of necessity, their
research may focus on a narrow subject, because there are limits to how
much one person can obsess over. But of course they know that their
particular categorical bucket isn’t the whole story.
Maybe yes, maybe no. Consider the following quotes from some
card-carrying scientists. The first:
Give me a dozen healthy infants, well formed, and my own
specified world to bring them up in and I’ll guarantee to take any
one at random and train him to become any type of specialist I
might select—doctor, lawyer, artist, merchant-chief and yes, even
beggar-man thief, regardless of his talents, penchants, tendencies,
abilities, vocations, and race of his ancestors.3
This was John Watson, a founder of behaviorism, writing around
1925. Behaviorism, with its notion that behavior is completely malleable,
that it can be shaped into anything in the right environment, dominated
American psychology in the midtwentieth century; we’ll return to
14