On average, mothers in individualist cultures, when compared with
those in collectivist ones, speak louder, play music louder, have more
animated expressions.54 They view themselves as teachers rather than
protectors, abhor a bored child, value high-energy affect. Their games
emphasize individual competition, urge hobbies involving doing rather
than observing. Kids are trained in verbal assertiveness, to be
autonomous and influential. Show a cartoon of a school of fish with one
out front, and she’ll describe it to her child as the leader.*
Mothers in collectivist cultures, in contrast, spend more time than
individualist mothers soothing their child, maintaining contact, and
facilitating contact with other adults. They value low arousal affect and
sleep with their child to a later age. Games are about cooperation and
fitting in; if playing with her child with, say, a toy car, the point is not
exploring what a car does (i.e., being automobile), but the process of
sharing (“Thank you for giving me your car; now I’ll give it back to
you”). Kids are trained to get along, think of others, accept and adapt,
rather than change situations; morality and conformity are nearly
synonymous. Show the cartoon of the school of fish, and the fish out
front must have done something wrong, because no one will play with
him.
Logically, kids in individualist cultures acquire ToM later than
collectivist-culture kids and activate pertinent circuits more to achieve
the same degree of competence. For a collectivist child, social
competence is all about taking someone else’s perspective.55
Interestingly, kids in (collectivist) Japan play more violent video
games than do American kids, yet are less aggressive. Moreover,
exposing Japanese kids to media violence boosts aggression less than in
American kids.56 Why the difference? Three possible contributing
factors: (a) American kids play alone more often, a lone-wolf breeding
ground; (b) Japanese kids rarely have a computer or TV in their
bedroom, so they play near their parents; (c) Japanese video-game
violence is more likely to have prosocial, collectivist themes.
More in chapter 9 on collectivist versus individualist cultures.
Cultures of Honor
207