score; you must be so smart” or “What a great score, you must have
worked so hard.” When you praise kids for working hard, they tend to
work harder the next time, show more resilience, enjoy the process more,
and become more likely to value the accomplishment for its own sake
(rather than for the grade). Praise kids for being smart, and precisely the
opposite occurs. When it becomes all about being smart, effort begins to
seem suspect, beneath you—after all, if you’re really so smart, you
shouldn’t have to work hard; you glide, you don’t sweat and grunt.20
Beautiful work that has achieved cult status among many thoughtful
parents of gifted kids, who want to understand when their child’s smarts
shouldn’t come into the picture.
Why do “You’re so smart” and “You work so hard” have such
different effects? Because they fall on either side of one of the deepest
lines drawn by believers in mitigated free will. It is the belief that one
assigns aptitude and impulse to biology and effort and resisting impulse
to free will.
It’s cool to see natural ability in action. The great all-around athlete
who has never seen pole-vaulting before, watches it once, tries it once,
and soars like a pro. Or the singer whose voice has always had a natural
timbre that evokes emotions you never knew existed. Or that student in
your class who obviously just gets it, two seconds into your explaining
something really abstruse.
That’s impressive. But then there’s inspiring. When I was a kid, I
repeatedly read a book about Wilma Rudolph. She was the fastest female
runner in the world in 1960, an Olympian who became a civil rights
pioneer. Definitely impressive. But consider that she was born
prematurely, underweight, one of twenty-two kids in a poor Tennessee
family, and—get this—at age four got polio, resulting in a leg brace and
a twisted foot. Polio, she was crippled by polio. And she defied every
expert’s expectations, worked and worked and worked through the pain,
and became the fastest there was. That’s inspiring.
In many domains we can sort of grasp the materialist building blocks
of natural ability. Someone has the optimal ratio of slow-twitch to fast-
twitch muscle fibers, producing a natural pole-vaulter. Or has vocal cords
with the perfect degree of velvety peach fuzz (I’m winging it here) to
produce an extraordinary voice. Or the ideal combination of
neurotransmitters, receptors, transcription factors, and so on, producing a
597