accordion throughout a female rat’s ovulatory cycle, with the size (and
her cognitive skills) peaking when estrogen peaks.*
Thus, neurons can form new dendritic branches and spines,
increasing the size of their dendritic tree or, in other circumstances, do
the opposite; hormones frequently mediate these effects.
Axonal Plasticity
Meanwhile, there’s plasticity at the other end of the neuron, where
axons can sprout offshoots that head off in novel directions. As a
spectacular example, when a blind person adept at Braille reads in it,
there’s the same activation of the tactile cortex as in anyone else; but
amazingly, uniquely, there is also activation of the visual cortex.13 In
other words, neurons that normally send axons to the fingertip-
processing part of the cortex instead have gone miles off course, growing
projections to the visual cortex. One extraordinary case concerned a
congenitally blind woman, adept at Braille, who had a stroke in her
visual cortex. And as a result, she lost the ability to read Braille—the
bumps on the page felt flattened, imprecise—while other tactile
functions remained. In another study, blind subjects were trained to
associate letters with distinctive tones, to the point where they could hear
a sequence of tones as letters and words. When these individuals would
“read with sound,” they’d activate the part of the visual cortex activated
in sighted individuals when reading. Similarly, when a person who is
deaf and adept at American Sign Language watches someone signing,
there is activation of the part of their auditory cortex normally activated
by speech.
The injured nervous system can “remap” in similar ways. Suppose
there is stroke damage to the part of your cortex that receives tactile
information from your hand. The tactile receptors in your hand work fine
but have no neurons to talk to; thus you lose sensation in your hand. In
the subsequent months to years, axons from those receptors can sprout
off in new directions, shoehorning their way into neighboring parts of the
cortex, forming new synapses there. An imprecise sense of touch may
slowly return to the hand (along with a less precise sense of touch in the
part of the body projecting to the cortical region that accommodated
those refugee axon terminals).
141