SOME CONCLUSIONS
T
he first half of the chapter explored where we are; the second, how
we most likely got here.
“Where we are” is awash in cultural variation. From our biological
perspective, the most fascinating point is how brains shape cultures,
which shape brains, which shape . . . That’s why it’s called coevolution.
We’ve seen some evidence of coevolution in the technical sense—where
there are significant differences between different cultures in the
distribution of gene variants pertinent to behavior. But those influences
are pretty small. Instead what is most consequential is childhood, the
time when cultures inculcate individuals into further propagating their
culture. In that regard, probably the most important fact about genetics
and culture is the delayed maturation of the frontal cortex—the genetic
programming for the young frontal cortex to be freer from genes than
other brain regions, to be sculpted instead by environment, to sop up
cultural norms. To hark back to a theme from the first pages of this book,
it doesn’t take a particularly fancy brain to learn how to motorically, say,
throw a punch. But it takes a fancy, environmentally malleable frontal
cortex to learn culture-specific rules about when it’s okay to throw
punches.
In another theme from the first half, cultural differences manifest
themselves in monumentally important, expected ways—say, whom it is
okay to kill (an enemy soldier, a cheating spouse, a newborn of the
“wrong” sex, an elderly parent too old to hunt, a teenage daughter who is
absorbing the culture around her rather than the culture her parents
departed). But the manifestations can occur in unlikely places—e.g.,
where your eyes look within milliseconds of seeing a picture, or whether
thinking of a rabbit prompts you to think of other animals or of what
rabbits eat.
Another key theme is the paradoxical influence of ecology.
Ecosystems majorly shape culture—but then that culture can be exported
and persist in radically different places for millennia. Stated most
straightforwardly, most of earth’s humans have inherited their beliefs
328