gatherers, and newfangled sedentary hunter-gatherers inappropriately
grouped with traditional nomadic ones.
Why Have People Gotten Less Awful?
Pinker’s answer reflects two factors. He draws on the sociologist
Norbert Elias, whose notion of the “civilizing process” centered on the
fact that violence declines when states monopolize force. That is coupled
with spread of commerce and trade, fostering realpolitik self-restraint—
recognizing that it’s better to have this other person alive and trading
with you. Their well-being begins to matter, prompting what Pinker calls
an “escalator of reasoning”—an enlarged capacity for empathy and Us-
ness. This underlies the “rights revolution”—civil rights, women’s rights,
children’s rights, gay rights, animal rights. This view is a triumph of
cognition. Pinker yokes this to the “Flynn effect,” the well-documented
increase in average IQ over the last century; he invokes a moral Flynn
effect, as increasing intelligence and respect for reasoning fuel better
Theory of Mind and perspective taking and an increased ability to
appreciate the long-term advantages of peace. In the words of one
reviewer, Pinker is “not too fainthearted to call his own culture
civilized.”3
Predictably, this has drawn fire from all sides. The Left charges that
this giddy overvaluing of the dead-white-male Enlightenment fuels
Western neoimperialism.4 My personal political instincts run in this
direction. Nonetheless, one must admit that the countries with minimal
violence, extensive social safety nets, few child brides, numerous female
legislators, and sacrosanct civil liberties are usually direct cultural
descendants of the Enlightenment.
Meanwhile, the Right claims that Pinker ignores religion, pretending
that decency was invented in the Enlightenment.5 He is eloquently
unapologetic about this—for him much of what has gone right reflects
people’s “shifting from valuing souls to valuing lives.” For others the
criticism is that this escalator of reasoning fetishizes cognition over
affect—after all, sociopaths have great Theory of Mind, a (damage-
induced) purely rational mind makes abhorrent moral judgments, and a
sense of justice is fueled by the amygdala and insula, not the dlPFC.
618