notoriously told Kaplan, “Those may look like neurons in New Mexico,
but they don’t in New Haven.” Kaplan soon left research (and a quarter
century later, amid the excitement of the rediscovery of adult
neurogenesis, wrote a short memoir entitled “Environmental Complexity
Stimulates Visual Cortex Neurogenesis: Death of a Dogma and a
Research Career”).
The field lay dormant for another decade until unexpected evidence
of adult neurogenesis emerged from the lab of Fernando Nottebohm of
Rockefeller University. Nottebohm, a highly accomplished and esteemed
neuroscientist, as good an old boy as you get, studied the neuroethology
of birdsong. He demonstrated something remarkable, using new, more
sensitive techniques: new neurons are made in the brains of birds that
learn a new territorial song each year.
The quality of the science and Nottebohm’s prestige silenced those
who doubted that neurogenesis occurred. Instead they questioned its
relevance—oh, that’s nice for Fernando and his birdies, but what about
in real species, in mammals?
But this was soon convincingly shown in rats, using newer, fancier
techniques. Much of this was the work of two young scientists, Elizabeth
Gould of Princeton, and Fred “Rusty” Gage of the Salk Institute.
Soon lots of other people were finding adult neurogenesis with these
new techniques, including, lo and behold, Rakic.20 A new flavor of
skepticism emerged, led by Rakic. Yes, the adult brain makes new
neurons, but only a few, they don’t live long, and it doesn’t happen
where it really counts (i.e., the cortex); moreover, this has been shown
only in rodents, not in primates. Soon it was shown in monkeys.*21
Yeah, said the skeptics, but not humans, and besides, there’s no evidence
that these new neurons are integrated into preexisting circuits and
actually function.
All of that was eventually shown—there’s considerable adult
neurogenesis in the hippocampus (where roughly 3 percent of neurons
are replaced each month) and lesser amounts in the cortex.22 It happens
in humans throughout adult life. Hippocampal neurogenesis, for
example, is enhanced by learning, exercise, estrogen, antidepressants,
environmental enrichment, and brain injury* and inhibited by various
stressors.*23 Moreover, the new hippocampal neurons integrate into
preexisting circuits, with the perky excitability of young neurons in the
perinatal brain. Most important, new neurons are essential for integrating
145