PEERS, SOCIAL ACCEPTANCE, AND
SOCIAL EXCLUSION
A
dolescent vulnerability to peer pressure from friends, especially
peers they want to accept them as friends, is storied. It can also be
demonstrated experimentally. In one Steinberg study adolescents and
adults took risks at the same rate in a video driving game. Adding two
peers to egg them on had no effect on adults but tripled risk taking in
adolescents. Moreover, in neuroimaging studies, peers egging subjects
on (by intercom) lessens vmPFC activity and enhances ventral striatal
activity in adolescents but not adults.21
Why do adolescents’ peers have such social power? For starters,
adolescents are more social and more complexly social than children or
adults. For example, a 2013 study showed that teens average more than
four hundred Facebook friends, far more than do adults.22 Moreover,
teen sociality is particularly about affect, and responsiveness to
emotional signaling—recall the greater limbic and lesser frontal cortical
response to emotional faces in adolescents. And teens don’t rack up four
hundred Facebook friends for data for their sociology doctorates. Instead
there is the frantic need to belong.
This produces teen vulnerability to peer pressure and emotional
contagion. Moreover, such pressure is typically “deviance training,”
increasing the odds of violence, substance abuse, crime, unsafe sex, and
poor health habits (few teen gangs pressure kids to join them in tooth
flossing followed by random acts of kindness). For example, in college
dorms the excessive drinker is more likely to influence the teetotaling
roommate than the reverse. The incidence of eating disorders in
adolescents spreads among peers with a pattern resembling viral
contagion. The same occurs with depression among female adolescents,
reflecting their tendency to “co-ruminate” on problems, reinforcing one
another’s negative affect.
Neuroimaging studies show the dramatic sensitivity of adolescents to
peers. Ask adults to think about what they imagine others think of them,
then about what they think of themselves. Two different, partially
162