of Tanzania to nearly 90 percent for sedentary fishing cultures. And
across the cultures a greater degree of market integration strongly
predicted people making fairer offers in all three games and being
willing to pay for both self-interested second-party and altruistic third-
party punishment of creeps. For example, the Hadza, at one extreme,
kept an average of 73 percent of the spoils for themselves in the Dictator
Game, while the sedentary fishing Sanquianga of Colombia, along with
people in the United States and Accra, approached dictating a 50:50
split. Market integration predicts more willingness to punish selfishness
and, no surprise, less selfishness.
Community size: The bigger the community, the more the incidence of
second- and third-party punishment of cheapskates. Hadza, for example,
in their tiny bands of fifty or fewer, would pretty much accept any offer
above zero in the Ultimatum Game—there was no punishment. At the
other extreme, in communities of five thousand or more (sedentary
agriculturalists and aquaculturalists, plus the Ghanaian and American
urbanites), offers that weren’t in the ballpark of 50:50 were typically
rejected and/or punished.
Religion: What percentage of the population belonged to a worldwide
religion (i.e., Christianity or Islam)? This ranged from none of the Hadza
to 60 to 100 percent for all the other groups. The greater the incidence of
belonging to a Western religion, the more third-party punishment (i.e.,
willingness to pay to punish person A for being unfair to person B).
What to make of these findings?
First the religion angle. This was a finding not about religiosity
generally but about religiosity within a worldwide religion, and not about
generosity or fairness but about altruistic third-party punishment. What is
it about worldwide religions? As we saw in chapter 9, it is only when
groups get large enough that people regularly interact with strangers that
cultures invent moralizing gods. These are not gods who sit around the
banquet table laughing with detachment at the foibles of humans down
below, or gods who punish humans for lousy sacrificial offerings. These
are gods who punish humans for being rotten to other humans—in other
words, the large religions invent gods who do third-party punishment.
No wonder this predicts these religions’ adherents being third-party
punishers themselves.
Next the twin findings that more market integration and bigger
community size were associated with fairer offers (for the former) and
498