A MYTHIC LEAP FORWARD
I
n the early 1990s scientists at the University of Parma in Italy, led by
Giacomo Rizzolatti and Vittorio Gallese, reported something that,
depending on your tastes, ranged from really interesting to revolutionary.
They had been studying an area of the brain called the premotor cortex
(PMC) in rhesus monkeys, examining what sorts of stimuli would cause
individual neurons there to activate. Back to the PMC from chapter 2.
“Executive” neurons in the PFC decide something, passing the news to
the rest of the frontal cortex just behind it. Which sends projections to
the PMC just behind it. Which sends projections one step further back, to
the motor cortex, which then sends commands to muscles. Thus the
PMC straddles the divide between thinking about and carrying out a
movement.29
The group had discovered some mighty quirky PMC neurons.
Suppose a monkey carried out a behavior—grasping some food and
bringing it to her mouth. Naturally, some neurons in the PMC would
have activated. If she did a different movement—grasping an object and
placing it in a container—a different (partially overlapping) array of
PMC neurons were involved. What the group reported was that some of
the bring-food-to-mouth neurons would also activate if the monkey
observed someone else (monkey or human) making that movement.
Same for some of the place-object-in-container neurons. Same for subtler
movements like facial expressions. Consistently, about 10 percent of the
PMC neurons devoted to doing movement X also activated when
observing someone else doing movement X—very odd for neurons a few
steps away from commanding muscles to move. The neurons were
concerned with the mirroring of movements. And thus were “mirror
neurons” announced to the world.
Naturally, everyone looked for mirror neurons in humans, and their
existence in roughly the same part of the brain*30 was soon inferred with
brain imaging studies (“inferred” because that approach tells you about
the activity of large numbers of neurons at a time, rather than single
ones). Then individual neurons were shown to be mirroresque in humans
(in patients undergoing neurosurgery to control a rare type of epilepsy).31
535