start with some breathtaking demographic statistics born of cultural
differences: a girl born in Monaco has a ninety-three-year life
expectancy; one in Angola, thirty-nine. Latvia has 99.9 percent literacy;
Niger, 19 percent. More than 10 percent of children in Afghanistan die in
their first year, about 0.2 percent in Iceland. Per-capita GDP is $137,000
in Qatar, $609 in the Central African Republic. A woman in South Sudan
is roughly a thousand times more likely to die in childbirth than a woman
in Estonia.9
The experience of violence also varies enormously by culture.
Someone in Honduras is 450 times more likely to be murdered than
someone in Singapore. 65 percent of women experience intimate-partner
violence in Central Africa, 16 percent in East Asia. A South African
woman is more than one hundred times more likely to be raped than one
in Japan. Be a school kid in Romania, Bulgaria, or Ukraine, and you’re
about ten times more likely to be chronically bullied than a kid in
Sweden, Iceland, or Denmark (stay tuned for a closer look at this).10
Of course, there are the well-known gender-related cultural
differences. There are the Scandinavian countries approaching total
gender equality and Rwanda, with 63 percent of its lower-house
parliamentary seats filled by women, compared with Saudi Arabia,
where women are not allowed outside the house unless accompanied by
a male guardian, and Yemen, Qatar, and Tonga, with 0 percent female
legislators (and with the United States running around 20 percent).11
Then there’s the Philippines, where 93 percent of people say they feel
happy and loved, versus 29 percent of Armenians. In economic games,
people in Greece and Oman are more likely to spend resources to punish
overly generous players than to punish those who are cheaters, whereas
among Australians such “antisocial punishment” is nonexistent. And
there are wildly different criteria for prosocial behavior. In a study of
employees throughout the world working for the same multinational
bank, what was the most important reason cited to help someone?
Among Americans it was that the person had previously helped them; for
Chinese it was that the person was higher ranking; in Spain, that they
were a friend or acquaintance.12
Your life will be unrecognizably different, depending on which
culture the stork deposited you into. In wading through this variability,
there are some pertinent patterns, contrasts, and dichotomies.
272