Conversely, each TF usually activates more than one gene, meaning that
multiple genes are typically activated in networks (for example, cell
injury causes a TF called NF-κB to activate a network of inflammation
genes). Suppose the promoter upstream of gene 3 that responds to
promoter TF-A has a mutation making it responsive to TF-B. Result?
Gene 3 is now activated as part of a different network. Same
networkwide outcome if there is a mutation in a gene for a TF, producing
a protein that binds to a different promoter type.4
Consider this: the human genome codes for about 1,500 different
TFs, contains 4,000,000 TF-binding sites, and the average cell uses about
200,000 such sites to generate its distinctive gene-expression profile.5
This is boggling.
Epigenetics
The last chapter introduced the phenomenon of environmental
influences freezing genetic on/off in one position. Such “epigenetic”
changes* were relevant to events, particularly in childhood, causing
persistent effects on the brain and behavior. For example, recall those
pair-bonding prairie voles; when females and males first mate, there are
epigenetic changes in regulation of oxytocin and vasopressin receptor
genes in the nucleus accumbens, that target of mesolimbic dopamine
projection.6
Let’s translate the last chapter’s imagery of “freezing on/off
switches” into molecular biology.7 What mechanisms underlie epigenetic
changes in gene regulation? An environmental input results in a chemical
being attached tightly to a promoter, or to some nearby structural
proteins surrounding DNA. The result of either is that TFs can no longer
access or properly bind to the promoter, thus silencing the gene.
As emphasized in the last chapter, epigenetic changes can be
multigenerational.8 Dogma was that all the epigenetic marks (i.e.,
changes in the DNA or surrounding proteins) were erased in eggs and
sperm. But it turns out that epigenetic marks can be passed on by both
(e.g., make male mice diabetic, and they pass the trait to their offspring
via epigenetic changes in sperm).
Recall one of the great punching bags of science history, the
eighteenth-century French biologist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck.9 All
230