you and another player. The other person can accept the split or reject it,
in which case neither of you gets anything. Prior research had shown that
when someone’s offer is rejected, they feel dissed, subordinated,
especially if news of that carries into future rounds with other players. In
other words, in this scenario status and reputation rest on being fair.
And what happens when subjects were given testosterone
beforehand? People made more generous offers. What the hormone
makes you do depends on what counts as being studly. This requires
some fancy neuroendocrine wiring that is sensitive to social learning.
You couldn’t ask for a finding more counter to testosterone’s reputation.
The study contained a slick additional finding that further separated
testosterone myth from reality. As per usual, subjects got either
testosterone or saline, without knowing which. Subjects who believed it
was testosterone (independent of whether it actually was) made less
generous offers. In other words, testosterone doesn’t necessarily make
you behave in a crappy manner, but believing that it does and that you’re
drowning in the stuff makes you behave in a crappy manner.
Additional studies show that testosterone promotes prosociality in the
right setting. In one, under circumstances where someone’s sense of
pride rides on honesty, testosterone decreased men’s cheating in a game.
In another, subjects decided how much of a sum of money they would
keep and how much they would publicly contribute to a common pool
shared by all the players; testosterone made most subjects more
prosocial.21
What does this mean? Testosterone makes us more willing to do
what it takes to attain and maintain status. And the key point is what it
takes. Engineer social circumstances right, and boosting testosterone
levels during a challenge would make people compete like crazy to do
the most acts of random kindness. In our world riddled with male
violence, the problem isn’t that testosterone can increase levels of
aggression. The problem is the frequency with which we reward
aggression.
105