march to the coast to rendezvous with a British ship. One day the
party saw the snows of Crete’s highest peak. Kreipe mumbled to
himself the first line (in Latin) of an ode by Horace about a
snowcapped mountain. At which point the British commander,
Patrick Leigh Fermor, continued the recitation. The two men
realized that they had, in Leigh Fermor’s words, “drunk at the
same fountains.” A recategorization. Leigh Fermor had Kreipe’s
wounds treated and personally ensured his safety through the
remainder of the march. The two stayed in touch after the war
and were reunited decades later on Greek television. “No hard
feelings,” said Kreipe, praising Leigh Fermor’s “daring
operation.”54
And finally there is the World War I Christmas truce, something
I will consider at length in the final chapter. This is the famed
event where soldiers on both sides spent the day singing,
praying, and partying together, playing soccer, and exchanging
gifts, and soldiers up and down the lines struggled to extend the
truce. It took all of one day for British-versus-German to be
subordinated to something more important—all of us in the
trenches versus the officers in the rear who want us to go back to
killing each other.
Thus Us/Them dichotomies can wither away into being historical
trivia questions like the Cagots and can have their boundaries shifted at
the whims of a census. Most important, we have multiple dichotomies in
our heads, and ones that seem inevitable and crucial can, under the right
circumstances, have their importance evaporate in an instant.
Cold and/or Incompetent
That both a gibbering schizophrenic homeless man and a successful
businessman from a resented ethnic group can be a Them demonstrates
something crucial—different types of Thems evoke different feelings in
us, anchored in differences in the neurobiologies of fear and disgust.55
As but one example, fear-evoking faces cause us to watch vigilantly and
activate the visual cortex; disgust-evoking faces do the opposite.
412