anybody knows about the guy now is that he was wrong about heredity.
Suppose a giraffe habitually stretches her neck to reach leaves high in a
tree; this lengthens her neck. According to Lamarck, when she has
babies, they will have longer necks because of “acquired inheritance.”*
Lunatic! Buffoon! Epigenetically mediated mechanisms of inheritance—
now often called “neo-Lamarckian inheritance”—prove Lamarck right in
this narrow domain. Centuries late, the guy’s getting some acclaim.
Thus, not only does environment regulate genes, but it can do so with
effects that last days to lifetimes.
The Modular Construction of Genes: Exons and
Introns
Time to do in another dogma about DNA. It turns out that most genes
are not coded for by a continuous stretch of DNA. Instead there might be
a stretch of noncoding DNA in the middle. In that case, the two separate
stretches of coding DNA are called “exons,” separated by an “intron.”
Many genes are broken into numerous exons (with, logically, one less
intron than the number of exons).
How do you produce a protein from an “exonic” gene? The RNA
photocopy of the gene initially contains the exons and introns; an
enzyme removes the intronic parts and splices together the exons.
Clunky, but with big implications.
Back to each particular gene coding for a particular protein.10 Introns
and exons destroy this simplicity. Imagine a gene consisting of exons 1,
2, and 3, separated by introns A and B. In one part of the body a splicing
enzyme exists that splices out the introns and also trashes exon 3,
producing a protein coded for by exons 1 and 2. Meanwhile, elsewhere
in the body, a different splicing enzyme jettisons exon 2 along with the
introns, producing a protein derived from exons 1 and 3. In another cell
type a protein is made solely from exon 1. . . . Thus “alternative splicing”
can generate multiple unique proteins from a single stretch of DNA; so
much for “one gene specifies one protein”—this gene specifies seven (A,
B, C, A-B, A-C, B-C, and A-B-C). Remarkably, 90 percent of human
genes with exons are alternatively spliced. Moreover, when a gene is
regulated by multiple TFs, each can direct the transcription of a different
231