ranking males have the highest testosterone levels for
the first months but not years after group formation.
During unstable times, the high-testosterone/high-rank
relationship is more a consequence of the high rates of
fighting among the high-ranking cohort than of rank
itself.16
Reiterating the “challenge hypothesis,” the elevation in
testosterone levels caused by fighting is not so much
about aggression as about challenge. If status is
maintained aggressively, testosterone fosters aggression;
if status were maintained by writing beautiful, delicate
haikus, testosterone would foster that.
Next we consider the relationship between rank and stress. Are
different ranks associated with different levels of stress hormones, styles
of coping, and incidences of stress-related disease? Is it more stressful to
be dominant or subordinate?
An extensive literature shows that a sense of control and
predictability reduces stress. Yet monkey research conducted by Joseph
Brady in 1958 produced a different view. Half the animals could press a
bar to delay shocks (“executive” monkeys); the passive other half
received a shock whenever the executive did. And the executive
monkeys, with their control and predictability, were more likely to
ulcerate. This birthed the “executive stress syndrome”—those on top are
burdened with the stressors of control, leadership, and responsibility.17
Executive stress syndrome became a meme. But a huge problem was
that monkeys were not randomly assigned to be “executives” and
“nonexecutives.” Instead, those that pressed the bar soonest in pilot
studies were made executives.* Such monkeys were subsequently shown
to be more emotionally reactive, so Brady had inadvertently stacked the
executive side with the ulcer-prone neurotics.
So much for ulcerating executives; contemporary studies show that
the worst stress-related health typically occurs in middle management,
with its killer combo of high work demands but little autonomy—
responsibility without control.
By the 1970s dogma held that subordinate organisms are the most
stressed and unhealthy. This was first shown with lab rodents, where
subordinate animals typically had elevated resting levels of
437