people feel socially excluded and they become less generous and
empathic. Stress has the same effect, working via glucocorticoids;
Mogil’s group (with my involvement) recently showed that if you use a
drug to block glucocorticoid secretion, both mice and humans become
more empathic toward strangers. Thus, if you feel highly distressed,
whether due to resonating with someone else’s problems or because of
your own, tending to your own needs readily becomes the priority.49
In other words, empathic states are most likely to produce
compassionate acts when we manage a detached distance. This brings to
mind the anecdote from many chapters ago about the Buddhist monk I
encountered who said that, yes, sometimes he cuts short his cross-legged
meditation because of his knees, but not because he feels them hurting
—“I do it as an act of kindness to my knees.” And this is certainly in line
with the Buddhist approach to compassion, which views it as a simple,
detached, self-evident imperative rather than as requiring vicarious froth.
You act compassionately toward one individual because of a globalized
sense of wishing good things for the world.*
A handful of fascinating studies of Buddhist monks have been
carried out, both by Richard Davidson of the University of Wisconsin
and Tania Singer of the Max Planck Institutes in Germany. Remarkably,
given the science-versus-religion culture wars, such work was given its,
er, blessing and facilitated by the Dalai Lama, who is famously intrigued
by neuroscience and who has said that if his Dalai Lama gig hadn’t come
up, he would have wanted to be a scientist or engineer. The most
publicized work revolves around the neuroimaging of Matthieu Ricard, a
French-born Buddhist monk (who is the Dalai Lama’s French translator
and who just happens to have a PhD in molecular biology from the
Pasteur Institute—this is one interesting guy).50
When confronted with examples of human suffering and instructed to
empathically feel the pain of those people, Ricard showed activation of
the same circuitry as you’d see in most everyone else. And it was
extremely aversive—“The empathic sharing very quickly became
intolerable to me and I felt emotionally exhausted,” he explained. When
instead he did his Buddhist thing, focusing on thoughts of compassion, a
totally different picture of activation emerged—the amygdala was silent,
and instead there was heavy activation of the mesolimbic dopamine
system. He described it as “a warm positive state associated with a
strong prosocial motivation.”
543