stretches of DNA coding for genes, for promoters, for mysterious DNA
junk. Collect DNA from a huge number of people, and examine whether
particular SNPs associate with particular traits. If an SNP that’s
implicated occurs in a gene, you’ve just gotten a hint that the gene may
be involved in that trait.*
A GWAS study might implicate scads of genes as being associated
with a trait. Hopefully, some will be candidate genes already known to
be related to the trait. But other identified genes may be mysterious. Now
go check out what they do.
In a related approach, suppose you have two populations, one with
and one without a degenerative muscle disease. Take a muscle biopsy
from everyone, and see which of the ~20,000 genes are transcriptionally
active in the muscle cells. With this “microarray” or “gene chip”
approach, you look for genes that are transcriptionally active only in
diseased or in healthy muscle, not in both. Identify them, and you have
some new candidate genes to explore.*
These fishing expeditions* show why we’re so ignorant about the
genetics of behavior.60 Consider a classic GWAS that looked for genes
related to height. This was a crazy difficult study involving examining
the genomes of 183,727 people. 183,727. It must have taken an army of
scientists just to label the test tubes. And reflecting that, the paper
reporting the findings in Nature had approximately 280 authors.
And the results? Hundreds of genetic variants were implicated in
regulating height. A handful of genes identified were known to be
involved in skeletal growth, but the rest was terra incognita. The single
genetic variant identified that most powerfully predicted height
explained all of 0.4 percent—four tenths of one percent—of the variation
in height, and all those hundreds of variants put together explained only
about 10 percent of the variation.
Meanwhile, an equally acclaimed study did a GWAS regarding body
mass index (BMI). Similar amazingness—almost a quarter million
genomes examined, even more authors than the height study. And in this
case the single most explanatory genetic variant identified accounted for
only 0.3 percent of the variation in BMI. Thus both height and BMI are
highly “polygenic” traits. Same for age of menarche (when girls
menstruate for the first time). Moreover, additional genes are being
missed because their variants are too rare to be picked up by current
261