inequality), up goes psychological stress. A mammoth amount of
literature explores how such stress—lack of control,
predictability, outlets for frustration, and social support—
chronically activates the stress response, which, as we saw in
chapter 4, corrodes health in numerous ways.
A neomaterialist explanation has been offered by Robert Evans
of the University of British Columbia and George Kaplan of the
University of Michigan. If you want to improve health and
quality of life for the average person in a society, you spend
money on public goods—better public transit, safer streets,
cleaner water, better public schools, universal health care. But
the more income inequality, the greater the financial distance
between the wealthy and the average and thus the less direct
benefit the wealthy feel from improving public goods. Instead
they benefit more from dodging taxes and spending on their
private good—a chauffeur, a gated community, bottled water,
private schools, private health insurance. As Evans writes, “The
more unequal are incomes in a society, the more pronounced will
be the disadvantages to its better-off members from public
expenditure, and the more resources will those members have
[available to them] to mount effective political opposition” (e.g.,
lobbying). Evans notes how this “secession of the wealthy”
promotes “private affluence and public squalor.” Meaning worse
health for the have-nots.39
The inequality/health link paves the way for understanding how
inequality also makes for more crime and violence. I could copy and
paste the previous stretch of writing, replacing “poor health” with “high
crime,” and I’d be set. Poverty is not a predictor of crime as much as
poverty amid plenty is. For example, extent of income inequality is a
major predictor of rates of violent crime across American states and
across industrialized nations.40
Why does income inequality lead to more crime? Again, there’s the
psychosocial angle—inequality means less social capital, less trust,
cooperation, and people watching out for one another. And there’s the
neomaterialist angle—inequality means more secession of the wealthy
from contributing to the public good. Kaplan has shown, for example,
294