years (i.e., less than 0.1 percent of the time that oxytocin has existed), the
brains of humans and domesticated wolves evolved a new response to
oxytocin: when a dog and its owner (but not a stranger) interact, they
secrete oxytocin.30 The more of that time is spent gazing at each other,
the bigger the rise. Give dogs oxytocin, and they gaze longer at their
humans . . . which raises the humans’ oxytocin levels. So a hormone that
evolved for mother-infant bonding plays a role in this bizarre,
unprecedented form of bonding between species.
In line with its effects on bonding, oxytocin inhibits the central
amygdala, suppresses fear and anxiety, and activates the “calm,
vegetative” parasympathetic nervous system. Moreover, people with an
oxytocin receptor gene variant associated with more sensitive parenting
also have less of a cardiovascular startle response. In the words of Sue
Carter, exposure to oxytocin is “a physiological metaphor for safety.”
Furthermore, oxytocin reduces aggression in rodents, and mice whose
oxytocin system was silenced (by deleting the gene for oxytocin or its
receptor) were abnormally aggressive.31
Other studies showed that people rate faces as more trustworthy, and
are more trusting in economic games, when given oxytocin (oxytocin
had no effect when someone thought they were playing with a computer,
showing that this was about social behavior).32 This increased trust was
interesting. Normally, if the other player does something duplicitous in
the game, subjects are less trusting in subsequent rounds; in contrast,
oxytocin-treated investors didn’t modify their behavior in this way.
Stated scientifically, “oxytocin inoculated betrayal aversion among
investors”; stated caustically, oxytocin makes people irrational dupes;
stated more angelically, oxytocin makes people turn the other cheek.
More prosocial effects of oxytocin emerged. It made people better at
detecting happy (versus angry, fearful, or neutral) faces or words with
positive (versus negative) social connotations, when these were
displayed briefly. Moreover, oxytocin made people more charitable.
People with the version of the oxytocin receptor gene associated with
more sensitive parenting were rated by observers as more prosocial
(when discussing a time of personal suffering), as well as more sensitive
to social approval. And the neuropeptide made people more responsive
to social reinforcement, enhancing performance in a task where correct
or wrong answers elicited a smile or frown, respectively (while having
110