explanation, subject from all cultures punished people who made lowball
contributions, and to roughly equal extents.
Where the startling difference came was with a behavior that I’d
never even seen before in the behavioral economics literature, something
called “antisocial punishment.” Free-riding punishment is when you
punish another player for contributing less than you (i.e., being selfish).
Antisocial punishment is when you punish another player for
contributing more than you (i.e., being generous).
What is that about? Interpretation: This hostility toward someone
being overly generous is because they’re going to up the ante, and soon
everyone (i.e., me) will be expected to be generous. Kill ’em, spoiling
things for everyone. It’s a phenomenon where you punish someone for
being nice, because what if that sort of crazy deviance becomes the norm
and you feel pressure to be nice back?
At one extreme were subjects from countries (the United States and
Australia) where this weird antisocial punishment was nearly
nonexistent. And at the mind-boggling other extreme were subjects from
Oman and Greece, who were willing to spend more to punish generosity
than to punish selfishness. And this was not a comparison of, say,
theologians in Boston with Omani pirates. Subjects were all urban
university students.
So what’s different among these cities? The authors found a key
correlation—the lower the social capital in a country, the higher the rates
of antisocial punishment. In other words, when do people’s moral
systems include the idea that being generous deserves punishment?
When they live in a society where people don’t trust one another and feel
as if they have no efficacy.
Fascinating work has also been done specifically on people in non-
Western cultures, as reported in a pair of studies by Joseph Henrich, of
the University of British Columbia, and colleagues.29 Subjects were in
the thousands and came from twenty-five different “small-scale” cultures
from around the world—they were nomadic pastoralists, hunter-
gatherers, sedentary forager/horticulturalists, and subsistence
farmers/wage earners. There were two control groups, namely urbanites
from Missouri and Accra, Ghana. As a particularly thorough feature of
the study, subjects played three economic games: (a) The Dictator Game,
where the subject simply decides how money is split between them and
another player. This measures a pure sense of fairness, independent of
496