well.* Moreover, some of the sex differences in the brain seen in most
mammals don’t occur in hyenas or naked mole rats, reflecting their fetal
androgenization.
This suggests that elevated female aggression in sex-reversal species
arises from the elevated androgen exposure and, by extension, that the
diminished aggression among females of other species comes from their
low androgen levels.
But complications emerge. For starters, there are species (e.g.,
Brazilian guinea pigs) where females have high androgen levels but
aren’t particularly aggressive or dominant toward males. Conversely,
there are sex-reversal bird species without elevated androgen levels in
females. Moreover, as with males, individual levels of androgens in
females, whether in conventional or sex-reversal species, do not predict
individual levels of aggression. And most broadly, androgen levels don’t
tend to rise around periods of female aggression.59
This makes sense. Female aggression is mostly related to
reproduction and infant survival—maternal aggression, obviously, but
also female competition for mates, nesting places, and much-needed
food during pregnancy or lactation. Androgens disrupt aspects of
reproduction and maternal behavior in females. As emphasized by Hrdy,
females must balance the proaggression advantages of androgens with
their antireproductive disadvantages. Ideally, then, androgens in females
should affect the “aggression” parts of the brain but not the
“reproduction/maternalism” parts. Which is precisely what has evolved,
as it turns out.*60
Perimenstrual Aggression and Irritability
Inevitably we turn to premenstrual syndrome (PMS)*—the
symptoms of negative mood and irritability that come around the time of
menstruation (along with the bloating of water retention, cramps,
acne . . .). There’s a lot of baggage and misconceptions about PMS
(along with PMDD—premenstrual dysphoric disorder, where symptoms
are severe enough to impair normal functioning; it effects 2 to 5 percent
of women).61
The topic is mired in two controversies—what causes PMS/PMDD,
and how is it relevant to aggression? The first is a doozy. Is PMS/PMDD
118