a mouse merely observing another mouse experiencing that stressful
intruder paradigm.
An even more striking demonstration of “your pain is my pain” in
another species came in a 2006 Science paper from Jeff Mogil of McGill
University.6 A mouse would observe another mouse (separated from it
by Plexiglas) in pain, and, as a result, its own pain sensitivity increased.*
In another part of the study, an irritant would be injected in a mouse’s
paw; mice typically lick their paw at that point, with the amount of
licking indicating the amount of discomfort. Thus, X amount of the
irritant would produce Z amount of licking. However, if the mouse was
simultaneously observing a mouse who had been exposed to more than
X amount of irritant and who thus was licking more than Z amount, the
subject mouse would lick more than usual. Conversely, if the subject
observed a mouse licking less (having been exposed to less than X
amount of irritant), it would also lick less. Thus the amount of pain a
mouse was feeling was modulated by the amount of pain a nearby mouse
was. Importantly, this was a social phenomenon—this shared pain only
occurred between mice that were cagemates.*
Obviously we can’t know the internal state of these animals. Were
they feeling bad for the other mouse in pain, feeling “for” or “as if,”
taking the other mouse’s perspective? Pretty unlikely, making the use of
the word “empathy” in this literature controversial.7
However, we can observe overt behavior. Do other species
proactively lessen the distress of another individual? Yes.
As we will see in the final chapter, numerous species show
“reconciliative” behavior, where two individuals, soon after a negative
interaction, show higher-than-chance levels of affiliative behaviors
(grooming, sitting in contact) between them, and this decreases the odds
of subsequent tensions between them. As shown by de Waal and
colleagues, chimps also show third-party “consolation” behavior. This is
not when, after two individuals fight, some bleeding-heart chimp
indiscriminately nices both of them. Instead the consoler is preferentially
affiliative to the victim over the initiator of the fight. This reflects both a
cognitive component of tracking who started a tension and an affective
desire to comfort. Similar consolation, focused on fight victims, also
occurs in wolves, dogs, elephants, and corvids (who preen the feathers of
victims). Ditto for bonobos—with some bonoboesque sex thrown in for
523