THE METAPHORICAL DARK SIDE
O
ur brains’ confusion of the metaphorical with the literal literally
matters. Back to chapter 10 and the evolutionary emphasis on kin
selection. We saw the array of mechanisms used by various species for
recognizing kin and degree of relatedness—e.g., genetically shaped
pheromonal signatures and imprinting on the female whose birdsong you
heard a lot while you were still inside an egg. And we saw that among
other primates there are cognitive components as well (recall male
baboons’ degree of paternalism being predicted by their likelihood of
being the father). By the time we get to humans, the process is mostly
cognitive—we can think our way to deciding who is a relative, who is an
Us. And thus, as we saw, we can be manipulated into thinking that some
individuals are more related to us, and others less so, than they actually
are—pseudokinship and pseudospeciation. There are numerous ways to
get someone to think that an Other is so different that they barely count
as human. But as propagandists and ideologues have long known, if you
want to get someone to feel that an Other hardly counts as human, there’s
only one way to do it—engage the insula. And the surest way to do that
is with metaphor.
In 1994 many Westerners became aware of the existence of the
nation of Rwanda for the first time. The mountainous Central African
country is tiny, with one of the highest population densities in the world.
Way back when, it had been filled with hunter-gatherers who, as per
usual, had been displaced over the last millennium by agriculturalists and
pastoralists, who came to form the Hutu and Tutsi tribes, respectively. It
remains debated whether they arrived around the same century and
whether they were actually ethnically distinct groups, but the Hutu and
Tutsi Us/Them-ed with a vengeance. The minority Tutsi traditionally
dominated the Hutu, reflecting the common herdsman/farmer power
dynamics of Africa; German and Belgian colonials, in the classic divide
and conquer, exploited and inflamed the tribal animosities further.
With independence in 1962 came a turning of tables and Hutu
domination of the government. Discrimination and violence against
Tutsis drove many out of the country; over the subsequent years, many
571