things, a world reduced to simple, desiccated, furnace-blasted
basics that are approached with a deep fatalism. “I am the Lord
your God” and “There is but one god and his name is Allah” and
“There will be no gods before me”—dictates like these
proliferate. As implied in the final quote, desert monotheism
does not always come with only one supernatural being—
monotheistic religions are replete with angels and djinns and
devils. But they sure come with a hierarchy, minor deities paling
before the Omnipotent One, who tends to be highly
interventionist both in the heavens and on earth. In contrast,
think of tropical rain forest, teeming with life, where you can
find more species of ants on a single tree than in all of Britain.
Letting a hundred deities bloom in equilibrium must seem the
most natural thing in the world.
Pastoralism fosters cultures of honor. As introduced in chapter 7,
these are about rules of civility, courtesy, and hospitality,
especially to the weary traveler because, after all, aren’t all
herders often weary travelers? Even more so, cultures of honor
are about taking retribution after affronts to self, family, or clan,
and reputational consequences for failing to do so. If they take
your camel today and you do nothing, tomorrow they will take
the rest of your herd, plus your wives and daughters.*
Few of humanity’s low or high points are due to the culturally based
actions of, say, Sami wandering the north of Finland with their reindeer,
or Maasai cow herders in the Serengeti. Instead the most pertinent
cultures of honor are ones in more Westernized settings. “Culture of
honor” has been used to describe the workings of the Mafia in Sicily, the
patterns of violence in rural nineteenth-century Ireland, and the causes
and consequences of retributive killings by inner-city gangs. All occur in
circumstances of resource competition (including the singular resource
of being the last side to do a retributive killing in a vendetta), of a power
vacuum provided by the minimal presence of the rule of law, and where
prestige is ruinously lost if challenges are left unanswered and where the
answer is typically a violent one. Amid those, the most famous example
of a Westernized culture of honor is the American South, the subject of
283