twins as if they were MZ); and (c) comparing full-, half-, and step-
siblings who were reared together for differing lengths of time. Most of
these studies show that controlling for the assumption of MZs sharing
more environment than do DZs doesn’t significantly reduce the size of
genetic influences.*23 Hold that thought.
Criticism #2: MZ twins experience life more similarly starting as
fetuses. DZ twins are “dichorionic,” meaning that they have separate
placentas. In contrast, 75 percent of MZ twins share one placenta (i.e.,
are “monochorionic”).* Thus most MZ twin fetuses share maternal blood
flow more than do DZ twins, and thus are exposed to more similar levels
of maternal hormones and nutrients. If that isn’t recognized, greater
similarity in MZs will be misattributed to genes.
Various studies have determined what the chorionic status was in
different MZ pairs and then examined end points related to cognition,
personality, and psychiatric disease. By a small margin, most studies
show that chorionic status does make a difference, leading to
overestimates of genetic influence. How big of an overestimation? As
stated in one review, “small but not negligible.”24
Criticism #3: Recall that adoption studies assume that if a child is
adopted soon after birth, she shares genes but no environment with her
biological parents. But what about prenatal environmental effects? A
newborn just spent nine months sharing the circulatory environment with
Mom. Moreover, eggs and sperm can carry epigenetic changes into the
next generation. If these various effects are ignored, an environmentally
based similarity between mother and child would be misattributed to
genes.
Epigenetic transmission via sperm seems of small significance. But
prenatal and epigenetic effects from the mother can be huge—for
example, the Dutch Hunger Winter phenomenon showed that third-
trimester malnutrition increased the risk of some adult diseases more
than tenfold.
This confound can be controlled for. Roughly half your genes come
from each parent, but prenatal environment comes from Mom. Thus,
traits shared more with biological mothers than with fathers argue
against a genetic influence.* The few tests of this, concerning the genetic
influence on schizophrenia demonstrated in twin studies, suggest that
prenatal effects aren’t big.
239