A second case concerns Charles Whitman, the 1966 “Texas Tower”
sniper who, after killing his wife and mother, opened fire atop a tower at
the University of Texas in Austin, killing sixteen and wounding thirty-
two, one of the first school massacres. Whitman was literally an Eagle
Scout and childhood choirboy, a happily married engineering major with
an IQ in the 99th percentile. In the prior year he had seen doctors,
complaining of severe headaches and violent impulses (e.g., to shoot
people from the campus tower). He left notes by the bodies of his wife
and his mother, proclaiming love and puzzlement at his actions: “I
cannot rationaly [sic] pinpoint any specific reason for [killing her],” and
“let there be no doubt in your mind that I loved this woman with all my
heart.” His suicide note requested an autopsy of his brain, and that any
money he had be given to a mental health foundation. The autopsy
proved his intuition correct—Whitman had a glioblastoma tumor
pressing on his amygdala. Did Whitman’s tumor “cause” his violence?
Probably not in a strict “amygdaloid tumor = murderer” sense, as he had
risk factors that interacted with his neurological issues. Whitman grew
up being beaten by his father and watching his mother and siblings
experience the same. This choirboy Eagle Scout had repeatedly
physically abused his wife and had been court-martialed as a Marine for
physically threatening another soldier.* And, perhaps indicative of a
thread running through the family, his brother was murdered at age
twenty-four during a bar fight.8
A Whole Other Domain of Amygdaloid Function
to the Center Stage
Thus considerable evidence implicates the amygdala in aggression.
But if you asked amygdala experts what behavior their favorite brain
structure brings to mind, “aggression” wouldn’t top their list. It would be
fear and anxiety.9 Crucially, the brain region most involved in feeling
afraid and anxious is most involved in generating aggression.
The amygdala/fear link is based on evidence similar to that
supporting the amygdala/aggression link.10 In lab animals this has
involved lesioning the structure, detecting activity in its neurons with
“recording electrodes,” electrically stimulating it, or manipulating genes
in it. All suggest a key role for the amygdala in perceiving fear-
39