Samuel Provance (the U.S. soldier who revealed the abuses at Abu
Ghraib Prison), Edward Snowden.*
But there are also lesser-known people, acting alone or in small
numbers, with extraordinary impact. Take Mohamed Bouazizi, a twenty-
six-year-old fruit seller in Tunisia, then in its twenty-third year of corrupt
and repressive rule by a dictator. At the market the police hassled
Bouazizi about an imaginary permit, expecting a bribe. He refused, not
out of principle—he’d often bribed—but because he lacked the money.
He was kicked and spat upon, his fruit cart overturned. His complaint at
the government office was ignored. And within an hour of being preyed
upon by the police, on December 10, 2010, Bouazizi stood in front of
that office, doused himself with gasoline, shouted, “How do you expect
me to make a living?” and set himself on fire.
Bouazizi’s immolation and death triggered protests in Tunisia against
the leader, Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, against his ruling party, against the
police. The protests grew, and within a month the government and Ben
Ali were overthrown. Bouazizi’s act led to protests in Egypt, toppling
Hosni Mubarak’s thirty-year dictatorship. Likewise in Yemen, ending Ali
Abdullah Saleh’s thirty-four-year rule. And in Libya, leading to the
overthrow and killing of Muammar Gaddafi after forty-three years in
power. And in Syria, where protests morphed into civil war. And in
Jordan, Oman, and Kuwait, leading to the resignations of their prime
ministers. And in Algeria, Iraq, Bahrain, Morocco, and Saudi Arabia,
producing semblances of governmental reform. The Arab Spring.
Bouazizi wasn’t thinking about political reform in the Muslim world
when he lit the match; instead there was rage with nowhere to go but
inward. Make what you will of the Arab Spring’s brief hopefulness,
followed by new strongmen, violence, refugees, and the catastrophe of
Syria and ISIS. And perhaps history makes the self-immolator as much
as the self-immolator makes history—regional discontent had long been
brewing. Regardless, Bouazizi’s singular act catalyzed millions in twenty
countries to decide that they could cause change.
652