The context dependency of morality is crucial in an additional realm.
It is a nightmare of a person who, with remorseless sociopathy,
believes it is okay to steal, kill, rape, and plunder. But far more of
humanity’s worst behaviors are due to a different kind of person, namely
most of the rest of us, who will say that of course it is wrong to do X . . .
but here is why these special circumstances make me an exception right
now.
We use different brain circuits when contemplating our own moral
failings (heavy activation of the vmPFC) versus those of others (more of
the insula and dlPFC).24 And we consistently make different judgments,
being more likely to exempt ourselves than others from moral
condemnation. Why? Part of it is simply self-serving; sometimes a
hypocrite bleeds because you’ve scratched a hypocrite. The difference
may also reflect different emotions being involved when we analyze our
own actions versus those of others. Considering the moral failings of the
latter may evoke anger and indignation, while their moral triumphs
prompt emulation and inspiration. In contrast, considering our own
moral failings calls forth shame and guilt, while our triumphs elicit pride.
The affective aspects of going easy on ourselves are shown when
stress makes us more this way.25 When experimentally stressed, subjects
make more egoistic, rationalizing judgments regarding emotional moral
dilemmas and are less likely to make utilitarian judgments—but only
when the latter involve a personal moral issue. Moreover, the bigger the
glucocorticoid response to the stressor, the more this is the case.
Going easy on ourselves also reflects a key cognitive fact: we judge
ourselves by our internal motives and everyone else by their external
actions.26 And thus, in considering our own misdeeds, we have more
access to mitigating, situational information. This is straight out of
Us/Them—when Thems do something wrong, it’s because they’re
simply rotten; when Us-es do it, it’s because of an extenuating
circumstance, and “Me” is the most focal Us there is, coming with the
most insight into internal state. Thus, on this cognitive level there is no
inconsistency or hypocrisy, and we might readily perceive a wrong to be
mitigated by internal motives in the case of anyone’s misdeeds. It’s just
easier to know those motives when we are the perpetrator.
The adverse consequences of this are wide and deep. Moreover, the
pull toward judging yourself less harshly than others easily resists the
rationality of deterrence. As Ariely writes in his book, “Overall cheating
493