A GLIMMER
A
goal might be to use the good side of a double-edged sword to cut
loose the silver linings of clouds and save them for rainy days. Or
something metaphorically like that. The tool of the propagandist is to
effectively exploit symbols of revulsion in the service of hate. But the
odd literal metaphoring of our brains can also provide the peacemaker
with a highly effective tool.
In a moving, important 2007 paper in Science, the American/French
anthropologist Scott Atran, along with Robert Axelrod (of chapter 10’s
Prisoner’s Dilemma fame) and Richard Davis, a conflict expert at
Arizona State University, considered the power of what they called
“sacred values” in conflict resolution.29 These are straight out of
Greene’s world of two different cultures of shepherds fighting over a
commons, each with a different moral vision as to what is correct, each
passionately focused on “rights” whose meaning and power are
incomprehensible to the other side. Sacred values are defended far out of
proportion to their material or instrumental importance or likelihood of
success, because to any group such values define “who we are.” And
therefore, not only are attempts to reach compromises on such issues by
using material incentives unlikely to be productive, but they can be
insultingly counterproductive. You can’t buy us off into dishonoring that
which we hold sacred.
Atran and colleagues have studied the roles played by sacred values
in the context of Middle East conflict. In a world of sheer rationality
where the brain didn’t confuse reality with symbols, bringing peace to
Israel and Palestine would revolve solely around the concrete, practical,
and specific—placement of borders, reparations for Palestinian land lost
in 1948, water rights, the extent of militarization allowed to Palestinian
police, and so on. Solving those nuts-and-bolts issues may be a way of
ending war, but peace is not the mere absence of war, and making true
peace requires acknowledging and respecting the sacred values of Them.
Atran and colleagues found that, from the person in the street to the
highest offices of power, sacred values loomed large. They interviewed
senior Hamas leader Ghazi Hamad, asking what he sees as a requirement
576