convention was two shells back, often aimed at important targets. And
then the peace would resume. (Ashworth describes such a violation,
where Germans unexpectedly fired a shell into British trenches. Soon a
German shouted, “We are very sorry about that; we hope no one was
hurt. It is not our fault, it is that damned Prussian artillery.” And back
flew two British shells.)
Live and Let Live truces emerged repeatedly. And repeatedly brass in
the rear would intervene, rotating troops, threatening court-martials,
ordering savage raids requiring hand-to-hand combat that would shatter
any sense of shared interests between enemies.
We see the evolution—initial low-cost overtures with immediate
benefits, such as not shooting during dinner, transitioning through
gradations of increasingly elaborate restraint and signaling. And we
recognize the modified Tit for Tat in dealing with truce violations, with
its propensity toward cooperation, punishment for violations,
mechanisms for forgiveness, and clear rules.
So, hooray, just like social bacteria, we can evolve cooperation. But
one thing that a cooperative bacterium lacks is a psyche. Ashworth
thoughtfully explored the psychology of how Live and Let Live
participants began to view the enemy.
He described a sequence of steps. First, once any mutual restraint
emerged, the enemy had established that they were rational, with
incentives to hold fire. This prompted a sense of responsibility in dealing
with them; this was initially purely self-serving—don’t violate an
agreement because they’ll violate back. With time, the responsibility
developed a moral tinge, tapping into most people’s resistance to
betraying someone who deals reliably with them. The specific
motivations for truces generated insights—“Hey, they don’t want dinner
disturbed any more than we do; they don’t want to fight in this rain
either; they also deal with officers who screw up everything.” There’d be
a creeping sense of camaraderie.
This produced something striking. The war machines in combatant
countries spewed the usual pseudospeciating propaganda. But in
studying soldiers’ diaries and letters, Ashworth observed minimal
hostility toward the enemy expressed by trench soldiers; the further from
the front, the more hostility. In the words of one frontline soldier, quoted
by Ashworth, “At home one abuses the enemy, and draws insulting
caricatures. How tired I am of grotesque Kaisers. Out here, one can
666