ADOLESCENT RISK TAKING
I
n the foothills of the Sierras are California Caverns, a cave system
that leads, after an initial narrow, twisting 30-foot descent down a
hole, to an abrupt 180-foot drop (now navigable by rappelling). The Park
Service has found skeletons at the bottom dating back centuries,
explorers who took one step too far in the gloom. And the skeletons are
always those of adolescents.
As shown experimentally, during risky decision making, adolescents
activate the prefrontal cortex less than do adults; the less activity, the
poorer the risk assessment. This poor assessment takes a particular form,
as shown by Sarah-Jayne Blakemore of University College London.14
Have subjects estimate the likelihood of some event occurring (winning
the lottery, dying in a plane crash); then tell them the actual likelihood.
Such feedback can constitute good news (i.e., something good is actually
more likely than the person estimated, or something bad is less likely).
Conversely, the feedback can constitute bad news. Ask subjects to
estimate the likelihood of the same events again. Adults incorporate the
feedback into the new estimates. Adolescents update their estimates as
adults do for good news, but feedback about bad news barely makes a
dent. (Researcher: “How likely are you to have a car accident if you’re
driving while drunk?” Adolescent: “One chance in a gazillion.”
Researcher: “Actually, the risk is about 50 percent; what do you think
your own chances are now?” Adolescent: “Hey, we’re talking about me;
one chance in a gazillion.”) We’ve just explained why adolescents have
two to four times the rate of pathological gambling as do adults.15
So adolescents take more risks and stink at risk assessment. But it’s
not just that teenagers are more willing to take risks. After all,
adolescents and adults don’t equally desire to do something risky and the
adults simply don’t do it because of their frontal cortical maturity. There
is an age difference in the sensations sought—adolescents are tempted to
bungee jump; adults are tempted to cheat on their low-salt diet.
Adolescence is characterized not only by more risking but by more
novelty seeking as well.*16
158