There are dozens of neurotransmitters that have been identified.
Some of the most renowned: serotonin, norepinephrine, dopamine,
acetylcholine, glutamate (the most excitatory neurotransmitter in the
brain), and GABA (the most inhibitory). It’s at this point that medical
students are tortured with all the multisyllabic details of how each
neurotransmitter is synthesized—its precursor, the intermediate forms
the precursor is converted to until finally arriving at the real thing, the
painfully long names of the various enzymes that catalyze the syntheses.
Amid that there are some pretty simple rules built around three points:
a. You do not ever want to find yourself running for your
life from a lion and, oopsies, the neurons that tell your
muscles to run fast go off-line because they’ve run out
of neurotransmitter. Neurotransmitters are therefore
made from precursors that are plentiful; often they are
simple dietary constituents. Serotonin and dopamine, for
example, are made from the dietary amino acids
tryptophan and tyrosine, respectively. Acetylcholine is
made from dietary choline and lecithin.
b. A neuron can potentially have dozens of action
potentials a second. Each involves restocking the
vesicles with more neurotransmitter, releasing them, and
mopping up afterward. Given that, you do not want your
neurotransmitters to be huge, complex, ornate
molecules, each of which requires generations of
stonemasons to construct. Instead they are all made in a
small number of steps from their precursors. They’re
cheap and easy to make. For example, it takes only two
simple synthetic steps to turn tyrosine into dopamine.
c. Finally, to complete this pattern of neurotransmitter
synthesis as cheap and easy, multiple neurotransmitters
can be generated from the same precursor. In neurons
that use dopamine as the neurotransmitter, for example,
there are two enzymes that do those two construction
steps. Meanwhile, in norepinephrine-releasing neurons
there’s an additional enzyme that converts dopamine to
norepinephrine.
692