EMOTIONALLY CONTAGIOUS,
COMPASSIONATE ANIMALS
L
ots of animals display building blocks of empathic states (I use
“empathic state” throughout the chapter when referring to the
collectivity of sympathy, empathy, compassion, etc.). There’s mimicry, a
cornerstone of social learning in many species—think young chimps
watching Mom to learn to use tools. Ironically, humans’ strong proclivity
for imitation can have a downside. In one study chimps and children
observed an adult human repeatedly accessing a treat inside a puzzle
box; crucially, the person added various extraneous movements. When
exploring the box themselves afterward, chimps imitated only the steps
needed to open it, whereas kids “overimitated,” copying the superfluous
gestures as well.*3
Social animals are also constantly buffeted with emotional contagion
—shared states of arousal in a pack of dogs or male chimps going on a
border patrol. These are not terribly precise states, often spilling over
into other behaviors. For example, say some baboons flush out
something good to eat—say, a young gazelle. The gazelle is running like
hell, with these baboons in pursuit. And then the male in front seems to
think something along the lines of “Well, here I am running fast and—
WHAT? There’s my hated rival running right behind me! Why’s that jerk
chasing me?” He spins around for a head-on collision and fight with the
baboon behind him, gazelle forgotten.
Mimicry and emotional contagion are baby steps. Do other animals
feel one another’s pain? Sort of. Mice can learn a specific fear
association vicariously by observing another mouse experiencing the fear
conditioning. Moreover, this is a social process—learning is enhanced if
the mice are related or have mated.4
In another study a mouse would be exposed to an aggressive intruder
placed in its cage.5 As shown previously, this produces persistent adverse
consequences—a month later, such mice still had elevated glucocorticoid
levels and were more anxious and more vulnerable to a mouse model of
depression.* Importantly, the same persistent effects would be induced in
522