however, suffered twenty-eight deaths or injuries due to booby traps and
mines, reducing the company’s number to around one hundred. The
common interpretation, one that we readily recognize by now, is that
they had a fierce, vengeful desire to connect faces to this faceless enemy.
The official rationale was that the village harbored Viet Cong fighters
and civilian sympathizers; there is minimal evidence to support this.
Some of the participants reported being instructed to kill only Viet Cong
fighters; others that they should kill everyone, burn houses, kill
livestock, and destroy wells.
Regardless of these conflicting reports, the rest, as they say, is
agonizing history. Between 350 and 500 unarmed civilians, including
infants and elderly people, were killed. Bodies were mutilated and
dumped down wells, huts and fields set ablaze, numerous women gang-
raped before being killed. Calley was described to have personally shot
children under their mothers who had died sheltering them. The
Americans encountered no enemy fire, found no military-aged men. It
was destruction of biblical proportions, or Roman proportions, or
Crusader, or Viking, or . . . This destruction was photographed. The
horror is worsened because My Lai was not a solitary atrocity, and the
government labored to conceal events and slapped Calley on the wrist,
sentencing him to three years of house arrest.
There was by no means universal participation by Americans
(ultimately twenty-six soldiers were criminally charged, with Calley the
only one convicted; “just following orders” was the order of the day).*53
Individual thresholds varied. One soldier killed a mother and child and
then refused to do more. Another helped herd civilians together but
refused to fire. Some refused orders outright, even in the face of threats
of court-martial or being shot. One, PFC Michael Bernhardt, refused and
threatened to report events to superiors; officers subsequently placed him
on more dangerous patrols, perhaps hoping he’d be killed.
656