a doctor who testified as to his insanity, “The delusion was so strong that
nothing but a physical impediment could have prevented him from
committing the act [i.e., murder].” M’Naghten was so clearly impaired
that the prosecution withdrew criminal charges, agreeing with the
defense that he was insane. The jury agreed, and M’Naghten spent the
rest of his life in insane asylums, reasonably well treated by the
standards of the time.
There was bellowing protest after the jury’s decision, ranging from
the man in the street to Queen Victoria—M’Naghten had gotten away
with murder. The presiding judge was grilled by Parliament and stood by
the decision. The equivalent of the Supreme Court was tasked by
Parliament with assessing the case and supported him. And out of the
decision came the formalization of what is now the common criterion for
finding someone innocent by reason of insanity, namely the “M’Naghten
rule”: if, at the time of the crime, the person is so “laboring under such a
defect of reason from disease of the mind,” that he cannot distinguish
right from wrong.*
The M’Naghten rule was at the core of John Hinckley Jr. being found
not guilty for reasons of insanity in his attempted assassination of
Reagan in 1981, being hospitalized rather than jailed. There was
considerable “He’s getting away with it” outrage afterward; a number of
states banned the M’Naghten criterion, and Congress essentially banned
it for federal cases with the 1984 Insanity Defense Reform Act.*
Nonetheless, the reasoning behind M’Naghten has generally withstood
the test of time.
This is the essence of a stance of mitigated free will—people need to
be held responsible for their actions, but being floridly psychotic can be
a mitigating circumstance. It is the idea that there can be “diminished”
responsibility for our actions, that something can be semivoluntary.
Here’s how I’ve always pictured mitigated free will:
There’s the brain—neurons, synapses, neurotransmitters, receptors,
brain-specific transcription factors, epigenetic effects, gene
transpositions during neurogenesis. Aspects of brain function can be
influenced by someone’s prenatal environment, genes, and hormones,
whether their parents were authoritative or their culture egalitarian,
whether they witnessed violence in childhood, when they had breakfast.
It’s the whole shebang, all of this book.
589