Thus unequal cultures make people less kind. Inequality also makes
people less healthy. This helps explain a hugely important phenomenon
in public health, namely the “socioeconomic status (SES)/health
gradient”—as noted, in culture after culture, the poorer you are, the
worse your health, the higher the incidence and impact of numerous
diseases, and the shorter your life expectancy.38
Extensive research has examined the SES/health gradient. Four quick
rule-outs: (a) The gradient isn’t due to poor health driving down people’s
SES. Instead low SES, beginning in childhood, predicts subsequent poor
health in adulthood. (b) It’s not that the poor have lousy health and
everyone else is equally healthy. Instead, for every step down the SES
ladder, starting from the top, average health worsens. (c) The gradient
isn’t due to less health-care access for the poor; it occurs in countries
with universal health care, is unrelated to utilization of health-care
systems, and occurs for diseases unrelated to health-care access (e.g.,
juvenile diabetes, where having five checkups a day wouldn’t change its
incidence). (d) Only about a third of the gradient is explained by lower
SES equaling more health risk factors (e.g., lead in your water, nearby
toxic waste dump, more smoking and drinking) and fewer protective
factors (e.g., everything from better mattresses for overworked backs to
health club memberships).
What then is the principal cause of the gradient? Key work by Nancy
Adler at UCSF showed that it’s not so much being poor that predicts
poor health. It’s feeling poor—someone’s subjective SES (e.g., the
answer to “How do you feel you’re doing financially when you compare
yourself with other people?”) is at least as good a predictor of health as is
objective SES.
Crucial work by the social epidemiologist Richard Wilkinson of the
University of Nottingham added to this picture: it’s not so much that
poverty predicts poor health; it’s poverty amid plenty—income
inequality. The surest way to make someone feel poor is to rub their nose
in what they don’t have.
Why should high degrees of income inequality (independent of
absolute levels of poverty) make the poor unhealthy? Two overlapping
pathways:
A psychosocial explanation has been championed by Ichiro
Kawachi of Harvard. When social capital decreases (thanks to
293