What determines the shape and function of a protein? Any given
protein is made of a string of amino acids. There are about 20 different
types of amino acids—including some familiar ones like tryptophan and
glutamate. Each protein’s string of amino acids is unique—like the string
of letters that composes a word. Your typical protein is about 300 amino
acids long, and with 20 different amino acid types, there are nearly 10400
possible sequences (that’s ten followed by four hundred zeros)—more
atoms than there are in the universe.* The amino acid sequence of a
protein influences the unique shape(s) of that protein. Dogma used to be
that amino acid sequence determines the shape(s) of that protein, but it
turns out that the shape is also subtly altered by things like temperature
and acidity—in other words, environmental influences.
And what determines the sequence of amino acids that are strung
together to form a particular protein? A particular gene.
DNA AS THE BLUEPRINT FOR
CONSTRUCTING PROTEINS
DNA is another class of organic compounds, and just as there are
roughly 20 different types of amino acids, there are 4 different “letters”
(called nucleotides) that make up DNA. A sequence of 3 nucleotides
(called a codon) codes for a single amino acid. If there are 4 different
types of nucleotides, and each codon is 3 nucleotides long, there can be a
total of 64 different codons (4 possibilities in the first place × 4 in the
second × 4 in the third = 64). A few of those 64 are reserved to signal the
end of a gene, and after eliminating those “stop codons,” there are 61
different codons coding for 20 different amino acids. Therefore, there is
“redundancy”—almost all amino acids can be specified by more than
one unique codon (an average of about 3, i.e., 61/20). Typically the
different codons coding for the same amino acid differ by only a single
nucleotide. For example, four different codon sequences code for the
amino acid alanine: GCA, GCC, GCG, and GCT (A, C, G, and T are the
abbreviations for the four types of nucleotides).* Redundancy will be
important for understanding gene evolution.
712