continuum—what if 99 percent of the frontal cortex is destroyed? What
if 98 percent? This is of great practical importance, since a large
percentage of death row inmates have a history of damage to the frontal
cortex, particularly of the most disabling type, namely early in life.
In other words, amid differing opinions about where a line should be
drawn, believers in mitigated free will agree that massive amounts of
brain damage overwhelm a homunculus, while it should be expected to
handle at least some damage.
Responsibility at the Level of the Brain and at the
Social Level
The renowned neuroscientist Michael Gazzaniga, one of the leading
lights and elders of the field, has taken an extremely odd path in writing,
“Free will is an illusion, but you’re still responsible for your actions.”
This is expounded at length in a challenging book of his, Who’s in
Charge? Free Will and the Science of the Brain. Gazzaniga fully accepts
the entirely material nature of the brain but nonetheless sees room for
responsibility. “Responsibility exists at a different level of organization:
the social level, not in our determined brains.” I think either he is
actually saying, “Free will is an illusion, but for practical reasons, we are
still going to hold you responsible for your actions,” or he is
hypothesizing some manner of homunculus that exists only at a social
level. In response to the latter idea, the pages of this book show how our
social world is ultimately as much a product of our determined,
materialist brains as are our simple motor movements.*15
The Time Course of Decision Making
Another well-established fault line in a stance of mitigated free will
is that our capacity for free will moves to the forefront with decisions
that are slow and deliberative, whereas biological factors may push free
will aside in split-second-decision situations. In other words, the
homunculus is not always sitting right at the helm in the bunker; instead
it occasionally wanders off to grab a snack, and if something exciting
suddenly arises, those neurons may fire off commands to muscles and
593