study hasn’t been done (and would obviously be hard to do), you’d
predict that fast, intuitive decisions would overwhelmingly be in the
direction of easy, unconflicted selfishness, with “Them! Them!”
xenophobia alarms ringing and automatic beliefs of “Don’t trust Them!”
instantly triggered.
When facing Me-versus-Us moral dilemmas of resisting selfishness,
our rapid intuitions are good, honed by evolutionary selection for
cooperation in a sea of green-beard markers.35 And in such settings,
regulating and formalizing the prosociality (i.e., moving it from the
realm of intuition to that of cogitation) can even be counterproductive, a
point emphasized by Samuel Bowles.*
In contrast, when doing moral decision making during Us-versus-
Them scenarios, keep intuitions as far away as possible. Instead, think,
reason, and question; be deeply pragmatic and strategically utilitarian;
take their perspective, try to think what they think, try to feel what they
feel. Take a deep breath, and then do it all again.*
Veracity and Mendacity
The question rang out, clear and insistent, a question that could
not be ignored or evaded. Chris swallowed once, tried for a voice
that was calm and steady, and answered, “No, absolutely not.” It
was a bald-faced lie.
Is this a good thing or bad thing? Well, it depends on what the
question was: (a) “When the CEO gave you the summary, were you
aware that the numbers had been manipulated to hide the third-quarter
losses?” asked the prosecutor. (b) “Is this a toy you already have?” asked
Grandma tentatively. (c) “What did the doctor say? Is it fatal?” (d) “Does
this outfit make me look ____ ?” (e) “Did you eat the brownies that were
for tonight?” (f) “Harrison, are you harboring the runaway slave named
Jack?” (g) “Something’s not adding up. Are you lying about being at
work late last night?” (h) “OMG, did you just cut one?”
Nothing better typifies the extent to which the meanings of our
behaviors are context dependent. Same untruth, same concentration on
controlling your facial expression, same attempt to make just the right
amount of eye contact. And depending on the circumstance, this could be
511