more than do nonreligious people. Another factor is whether the
prosociality is public—conspicuous display is particularly important to
those religious people who strongly need social approval. As more
context dependency, in one study religious people were more charitable
than nonreligious ones—but only on their Sabbath.12
Another important issue: what kind of religion? As introduced in
chapter 9, Ara Norenzayan, Azim Shariff, and Joseph Henrich of the
University of British Columbia have identified links between features of
various religions and aspects of prosociality.13 As we saw, small-band
cultures (such as hunter-gatherers) rarely invent moralizing deities. It is
not until cultures are large enough that people regularly interact
anonymously with strangers that it becomes commonplace to invent a
judgmental god—the Judeo-Christian/Muslim deity.
In such cultures overt and subliminal religious cues boost
prosociality. In one study religious subjects unscrambled sentences that
did or didn’t contain religious terms (e.g., spirit, divine, sacred); doing
the former prompted generosity afterward. This is reminiscent of chapter
3’s finding that merely seeing a pair of eyes posted on a wall makes
people more prosocial. And showing that this is about being monitored,
unscrambling sentences with secular terms such as “jury,” “police,” or
“contract” had the same effect.14
Thus reminders of a judgmental god(s) boosts prosociality. It also
matters what that deity does about transgressions. Within and among
cultures, the more punitive the god, the more generosity to an
anonymous coreligionist. Do punitive gods make for more punitive
people (at least in an economic game)? In one study, no—save your cash,
God’s got it covered. In another, yes—a punitive god would want me to
be punitive as well. The UBC group has shown something ironic.
Priming people to think of God as punitive decreases cheating; thinking
of God as forgiving increases it. The researchers then studied subjects
from sixty-seven countries, considering the prevalence in each of belief
in the existence of a heaven and hell. The greater the skew toward belief
in hell, rather than heaven, the lower the national crime rate. When it
comes to Eternity, sticks apparently work better than carrots.
And what about religion facilitating the worst in us, with respect to
Thems? Well, one piece of evidence for this is, uh, like, human history.
Every major religion has historical blood on its hands—Buddhist monks
led the persecution of Rohingya Muslims in Burma, and a Quaker in the
624