This leads to a thoroughly fascinating finding—social conservatives
tend toward lower thresholds for disgust than liberals. In one study
subjects were exposed to either positively or negatively charged
emotional images,* and galvanic skin resistance (GSR, an indirect
measure of sympathetic nervous system arousal) was measured. The
biggest autonomic responses to negative (but not positive) emotional
images were in conservatives opposed to gay marriage or premarital sex
(while GSR response was unrelated to nonsocial issues like free trade or
gun control). Concerns about hygiene and purity sure predict valuing of
sanctity.45
Related to that, when confronted with something viscerally
disturbing, conservatives are less likely to use reappraisal strategies (e.g.,
when seeing something gory, thinking, “This isn’t real; it’s staged”).
Moreover, when conservatives, but not liberals, are instructed to use
reappraisal techniques (e.g., “Try to view the images in a detached,
unemotional way”), they express less conservative political sentiments.
In contrast, a suppression strategy (“Don’t let your feelings show when
you’re looking at this image”) doesn’t work. As we saw, make a liberal
tired, hungry, rushed, distracted, or disgusted, and they become more
conservative. Make a conservative more detached about something
viscerally disturbing, and they become more liberal.46
Thus political orientation about social issues reflects sensitivity to
visceral disgust and strategies for coping with such disgust. In addition,
conservatives are more likely to think that disgust is a good metric for
deciding whether something is moral. Which recalls Leon Kass, the
bioethicist with the ice cream–licking issues. He headed George W.
Bush’s bioethics panel, one that, thanks to Kass’s antiabortion ideology,
greatly restricted embryonic stem cell research. Kass has argued for what
he calls “the wisdom of repugnance,” where disgust at something like
human cloning can be “the emotional expression of deep wisdom,
beyond wisdom’s power completely to articulate it.” The visceral level,
with or without post-hoc rationalization, is all you need in order to know
what’s right. If it makes you puke, then you must rebuke.47
The monumental flaw is obvious. Different things disgust different
people; whose gag reflex wins? Moreover, things once viewed as
disgusting are viewed differently now (e.g., the idea of slaves having the
same rights as whites would probably have struck most white Americans
circa 1800 as not just economically unworkable but disgusting as well).
454