intuitionism interact. As we’ll see, (a) rather than being solely about
emotion, moral intuition is a different style of cognition from conscious
reasoning; and (b) conversely, moral reasoning is often flagrantly
illogical. Stay tuned.
The lack of predictability: Does any of this actually predict who does the
harder thing when it’s the right thing to do? Are gold medalists at
Kohlbergian reasoning the ones willing to pay the price for whistle-
blowing, subduing the shooter, sheltering refugees? Heck, forget the
heroics; are they even more likely to be honest in dinky psych
experiments? In other words, does moral reasoning predict moral action?
Rarely; as we will see in chapter 13, moral heroism rarely arises from
super-duper frontal cortical willpower. Instead, it happens when the right
thing isn’t the harder thing.
Marshmallows
The frontal cortex and its increasing connectivity with the rest of the
brain anchors the neurobiology of kids’ growing sophistication, most
importantly in their capacity to regulate emotions and behavior. The
most iconic demonstration of this revolves around an unlikely object—
the marshmallow.20
In the 1960s Stanford psychologist Walter Mischel developed the
“marshmallow test” to study gratification postponement. A child is
presented with a marshmallow. The experimenter says, “I’m going out of
the room for a while. You can eat the marshmallow after I leave. But if
you wait and don’t eat it until I get back, I’ll give you another
marshmallow,” and leaves. And the child, observed through a two-way
mirror, begins the lonely challenge of holding out for fifteen minutes
until the researcher returns.
Studying hundreds of three- to six-year-olds, Mischel saw enormous
variability—a few ate the marshmallow before the experimenter left the
room. About a third lasted the fifteen minutes. The rest were scattered in
between, averaging a delay of eleven minutes. Kids’ strategies for
resisting the marshmallow’s siren call differed, as can be seen on
contemporary versions of the test on YouTube. Some kids cover their
eyes, hide the marshmallow, sing to distract themselves. Others grimace,
sit on their hands. Others sniff the marshmallow, pinch off an infinitely
tiny piece to eat, hold it reverentially, kiss it, pet it.
185