Sociobiologists responded to spandrelism by noting that the rigor in
pronouncing something a spandrel was not intrinsically greater than that
in pronouncing it adaptive.76 In other words, the former provide just-not-
so stories. Psychologist David Barash and psychiatrist Judith Lipton
compared spandrelites to the character Topsy in Uncle Tom’s Cabin, who
states that she “just growed”—when faced with evidence of adaptation in
traits, they’d conclude that those traits are mere baggage, without
adaptive purpose, providing explanations that explained nothing—“just
growed stories.”
Furthermore, sociobiologists argued, adaptationist approaches were
more rigorous than Gouldian caricature; rather than explaining
everything and predicting nothing, sociobiological approaches predict
plenty. Is, say, competitive infanticide a just-so story? Not when you can
predict with some accuracy whether it will occur in a species based on its
social structure. Nor is the pair-bond/tournament comparison, when you
can predict a vast amount of information about the behavior, physiology,
and genetics of species ranging across the animal kingdom simply by
knowing their degree of sexual dimorphism. Furthermore, evolution
leaves an echo of selection for adaptive traits when there is evidence of
“special design”—complex, beneficial functions where a number of
traits converge on the same function.
—
All this would be your basic, fun academic squabble, except that
underlying the criticisms of adaptationism, gradualism, and sociobiology
is a political issue. This is embedded in the title of the spandrel paper:
the “Panglossian paradigm.” This refers to Voltaire’s Dr. Pangloss and
his absurd belief, despite life’s miseries, that this is the “best of all
possible worlds.” In this criticism, adaptationism stinks of the
naturalistic fallacy, the view that if nature has produced something, it
must be a good thing. That furthermore, “good” in the sense of, say,
solving the selective problem of water retention in deserts, is in some
indefinable way also morally “good.” That if ant species make slaves, if
male orangutans frequently rape females, and if for hundreds of
thousands of years hominin males drink milk directly out of the
container, it is because it is somehow “meant” to be that way.
When aired as a criticism in this context, the naturalistic fallacy had
an edge to it. In its early years human sociobiology was wildly
386