making. And many of our best and worst behaviors involve interactions
of the vmPFC with the limbic system and dlPFC.*
The functions of the cognitive dlPFC are the essence of doing the
harder thing.56 It’s the most active frontocortical region when someone
forgoes an immediate reward for a bigger one later. Consider a classic
moral quandary—is it okay to kill one innocent person to save five?
When people ponder the question, greater dlPFC activation predicts a
greater likelihood of answering yes (but as we’ll see in chapter 13, it also
depends on how you ask the question).
Monkeys with dlPFC lesions can’t switch strategies in a task when
the rewards given for each strategy shift—they perseverate with the
strategy offering the most immediate reward.57 Similarly, humans with
dlPFC damage are impaired in planning or gratification postponement,
perseverate on strategies that offer immediate reward, and show poor
executive control over their behavior.* Remarkably, the technique of
transcranial magnetic stimulation can temporarily silence part of
someone’s cortex, as was done in a fascinating study by Ernst Fehr of the
University of Zurich.58 When the dlPFC was silenced, subjects playing
an economic game impulsively accepted lousy offers that they’d
normally reject in the hopes of getting better offers in the future.
Crucially, this was about sociality—silencing the dlPFC had no effect if
subjects thought the other player was a computer. Moreover, controls and
subjects with silenced dlPFCs rated lousy offers as being equally unfair;
thus, as concluded by the authors, “subjects [with the silenced dlPFC]
behave as if they can no longer implement their fairness goals.”
What are the functions of the emotional vmPFC?59 What you’d
expect, given its inputs from limbic structures. It activates if the person
you’re rooting for wins a game, or if you listen to pleasant versus
dissonant music (particularly if the music provokes a shiver-down-the-
spine moment).
What are the effects of vmPFC damage?60 Lots of things remain
normal—intelligence, working memory, making estimates. Individuals
can “do the harder thing” with purely cognitive frontal tasks (e.g.,
puzzles where you have to give up a step of progress in order to gain two
more).
The differences appear when it comes to making social/emotional
decisions—vmPFC patients just can’t decide.* They understand the
options and can sagely advise someone else in similar circumstances.
58