social obligation now isn’t necessarily as much being altruistic to A as
paying the altruism forward to C. C pays it forward to D, etc. . . . This
stabilizing cooperation is ideal for big-game hunters, where two rules
hold: (a) your hunts are usually unsuccessful; and (b) when they are
successful, you typically have more meat than your family can consume,
so you might as well share it around. As has been said, an HG’s best
investment against future hunger is to put meat in other people’s
stomachs now.
Avoidance of despotism. As also covered in the next chapter, there’s
considerable evolutionary pressure for detecting cheating (when
someone reneges on their half of a reciprocal relationship). For nomadic
HGs, policing covert cheating is less of a concern than overt evidence of
intimidation and powermongering. HGs are constantly on guard against
bullies throwing their weight around.
HG societies expend lots of collective effort on enforcing fairness,
indirect reciprocity, and avoidance of despotism. This is accomplished
with that terrific norm-enforcement mechanism, gossip. HGs gossip
endlessly, and as studied by Polly Wiessner of the University of Utah,
it’s mostly about the usual: norm violation by high-status individuals.77
People magazine around the campfire.* Gossiping serves numerous
purposes. It helps for reality testing (“Is it just me, or was he being a
total jerk?”), passing news (“Two guesses who just happened to get a
foot cramp during the hairiest part of the hunt today”), and building
consensus (“Something needs to be done about this guy”). Gossip is the
weapon of norm enforcement.
HG cultures take similar actions—collectively subjecting miscreants
to criticism, shaming and mockery, ostracizing and shunning, refusing to
share meat, nonlethal physical punishment, expulsion from the group, or,
as a last resort, killing the person (done either by the whole group or by a
designated executioner).
Boehm documents such judicial killings in nearly half the pure HG
cultures. What transgressions merit them? Murder, attempts at grabbing
power, use of malicious sorcery, stealing, refusal to share, betrayal of the
group to outsiders, and of course breaking of sexual taboos. All typically
punished this way after other interventions have failed repeatedly.
—
325