protected from individuals who are dangerous. The latter can no more be
allowed to walk the streets than you can allow a car whose brakes are
faulty to be driven. Rehabilitate such people if you can, send them to the
Island of Misfit Toys forever if you can’t and they are destined to remain
dangerous. Josh Greene and Jonathan Cohen of Princeton wrote an
extremely clearheaded piece on this, “For the Law, Neuroscience
Changes Nothing and Everything.” Where neuroscience and the rest of
biology change nothing is in the continued need to protect the
endangered from the dangerous.30
Now for the nearly impossible issue, the one that “changes
everything”—the issue of punishment. Maybe, just maybe, a criminal
must suffer punishment at junctures in a behaviorist framework, as part
of rehabilitation, part of making recidivism unlikely by fostering
expanded frontal capacity. It is implicit in the very process of denying a
dangerous individual their freedom by removing them from society. But
precluding free will precludes punishment being an end in and of itself,
punishment being imagined to “balance” the scales of justice.
It is the punisher’s mind-set where everything must be changed. The
difficulty of this is explored in the superb book The Punisher’s Brain:
The Evolution of Judge and Jury (2014) by Morris Hoffman, a practicing
judge and legal scholar.31 He reviews the reasons for punishment: As we
see from game theory studies, because punishment fosters cooperation.
Because it is in the fabric of the evolution of sociality. And most
important, because it can feel good to punish, to be part of a righteous
and self-righteous crowd at a public hanging, knowing that justice is
being served.
This is a deep, atavistic pleasure. Put people in brain scanners, give
them scenarios of norm violations. Decision making about culpability for
the violation correlates with activity in the cognitive dlPFC. But decision
making about appropriate punishment activates the emotional vmPFC,
along with the amygdala and insula; the more activation, the more
punishment.32 The decision to punish, the passionate motivation to do
so, is a frothy limbic state. As are the consequences of punishing—when
subjects punish someone for making a lousy offer in an economic game,
there’s activation of dopaminergic reward systems. Punishment that feels
just feels good.
It makes sense that we’ve evolved such that it is limbic froth that is at
the center of punishing, and that a pleasurable dopaminergic surge
611