All this makes the ACC sound pretty self-oriented, mighty concerned
with your well-being. Which makes its empathy role initially surprising.
Nonetheless, numerous studies consistently show that if someone else’s
pain—a poked finger, a sad face, a tale of misfortune—is evoking an
empathic state in you, the ACC is involved.16 Moreover, the more
painful the other person’s situation seems to be, the more ACC
activation. The ACC is also central to doing something to alleviate
someone else’s distress.
The neuropeptide/hormone oxytocin gets into the mix. Recall from
chapter 4 how it promotes bonding and affiliative behaviors, trust, and
generosity.* Recall the study in which prairie voles are observed
consoling their stressed partner. And we’d expect, the effect depends on
the actions of oxytocin. Remarkably, the oxytocin works in the ACC—
selectively block oxytocin effects in the ACC, and voles don’t console.
So how do we go from the ACC as this outpost of self-interest,
monitoring your pain and whether you are getting what you think you
deserve, to the ACC allowing you to feel the pain of the wretched of the
earth? I think the link is a key issue of this chapter—how much is an
empathic state actually about yourself?17 “Ouch, that hurt” is a good way
to learn not to repeat whatever you just did. But often, even better is to
monitor someone else’s misfortune—“That sure seems to have hurt her;
I’m staying away from doing that.” Crucially, the ACC is essential for
learning fear and conditioned avoidance by observation alone. Going
from “She seems to be having a miserable time” to “Thus I should avoid
that” requires an intervening step of shared representation of self: “Like
her, I wouldn’t enjoy feeling that way.” Feeling someone else’s pain can
be more effective for learning than just knowing that they’re in pain. At
its core the ACC is about self-interest, with caring about that other
person in pain as an add-on.
Other brain regions are pertinent as well. As we saw, maturation of
the circuitry of empathy involves bringing into the mix not only the ACC
but the insula as well.18 By adulthood the insula (and to a lesser degree
the amygdala) is nearly as intertwined with experiencing empathy as is
the ACC. The three regions are highly interconnected, and a big chunk of
the amygdala texting the frontal cortex is funneled through the ACC.
Numerous circumstances that evoke a sense of empathy, particularly
physical pain, activate the insula along with the ACC, with the
magnitude of the response correlating with the subject’s basic proclivity
530