entreaties from people like you. No wonder
religiosity has health benefits (independent of the
community support that it brings and the decreased
rates of substance abuse).
Recall the role of the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) in sounding an alarm when there is a
discrepancy between how you thought things
worked and how they actually do. After controlling
for personality and cognitive abilities, more
religious people show less ACC activation when
getting news of a negative discrepancy. Other
studies show the anxiety-reducing effects of
repetitive religious rituals.9
c. Finally, all the world religions distinguish between Us
and Them, though they differ as to what is required to be
an Us and whether the pertinent attributes are
immutable.
Enough is known about the neurobiology of religiosity that there’s
even a journal called Religion, Brain and Behavior. Reciting a familiar
prayer activates mesolimbic dopaminergic systems. Improvising one
activates regions associated with Theory of Mind, as you try to
understand a deity’s perspective (“God wants me to be humble in
addition to grateful; better make sure I mention that”). Moreover, more
activation of this Theory of Mind network correlates with a more
personified image of a deity. Believing that someone is faith healing
deactivates the (cognitive) dlPFC, suspending disbelief. And performing
a familiar ritual activates cortical regions associated with habit and
reflexive evaluation.10
So are religious people nicer than nonreligious ones? It depends on
whether they’re interacting with in- or out-group members. Okay, are
religious people nicer to in-group members? Numerous studies say yes—
more volunteering (with or without a religious context), charitable
giving, and spontaneous prosociality, more generosity, trust, honesty, and
forgiveness in economic games. However, numerous studies show no
differences.11
Why the discrepancy? For starters, it matters whether data are self-
reported—religious people tend to inflate reports of their prosociality
623