In those times suffering that is local, that concerns an identified
appealing individual, and that is of a type with which you’re familiar
readily counts for more than suffering that is distant, involves a group,
and is an alien form of pain.* Aroused empathy produces tunnel-
visioned compassion that can wind up misplaced. As the philosopher
Jesse Prinz emphasizes, the point is not whose pain pains us the most but
who most needs our help.
Are There Ever Any Bloody Altruists?
Stop the presses; science has proven that it can feel good to do good,
complete with activation of the mesolimbic dopamine system. This
doesn’t even require a brain scanner. In a 2008 study in Science, subjects
were given either five dollars or twenty dollars; half were instructed to
spend it that day on themselves, half on someone else (ranging from a
friend to a charity). And comparisons of self-assessments of happiness at
the beginning and end of the day showed that neither the larger amount
of money nor the opportunity to spend it on oneself increased happiness;
only spending it on someone else did. And particularly interesting is that
other subjects, told about the design, predicted the opposite—that
happiness would be raised most by spending on oneself, and that twenty
dollars would buy more happiness than five.53
The question, of course, is why doing good can feel good, which
raises the classic question: is there ever a selfless act that contains no
element of self-interest? Does doing good feel good because there’s
something in it for you? I’m sure not going to tackle this from a
philosophical perspective. For biologists the most frequent stance is
anchored in chapter 10’s evolutionary view of cooperation and altruism,
one that always contains some element of self-interest.
Is this surprising? Pure selflessness is clearly going to be an uphill
battle if the very part of the brain most central to an empathic state—the
ACC—evolved to observe and learn from others’ pain for your own
benefit.54 The self-oriented rewards of acting compassionately are
endless. There’s the interpersonal—leaving the beneficiary in your debt,
thus turfing this from altruism to reciprocal altruism. There are the public
benefits of reputation and acclaim—the celebrity swooping into a
refugee camp for a photo op with starving kids made joyful by her
545