warfare in World War I, “At home one abuses the enemy, and draws
insulting caricatures. How tired I am of grotesque Kaisers. Out here, one
can respect a brave, skillful, and resourceful enemy. They have people
they love at home, they too have to endure mud, rain and steel.”
Whispers of Us-ness with people trying to kill you.58
And then there is the even stranger world of differing feelings about
the economic versus the cultural enemy, the relatively new enemy versus
the ancient one, or the distant alien enemy versus the neighboring enemy
whose miniscule differences have been inflated. These are the differing
subjugations that the British Empire inflicted on the Irish next door
versus on Australian aborigines. Or Ho Chi Minh, rejecting the offer of
Chinese troops on the ground during the Vietnam War, with a statement
to the effect of “The Americans will leave in a year or a decade, but the
Chinese will stay for a thousand years if we let them in.” And what’s
most pertinent about byzantine Iranian geopolitics—the millennia-old
Persian antipathy toward the Mesopotamians next door, the centuries-old
Shiite conflicts with Sunnis, or the decades-old Islamic hatred of the
Great Satan, the West?*
No discussion of the oddities of human Us/Them-ing is complete
without the phenomenon of the self-hating ________ (take your pick of
the out-group), where out-group members buy into the negative
stereotypes and develop favoritism for the in-group.59 This was shown
by psychologists Kenneth and Mamie Clark in their famed “doll
studies,” begun in the 1940s. They demonstrated with shocking clarity
that African American children, along with white children, preferred to
play with white dolls over black ones, ascribing more positive attributes
(e.g., nice, pretty) to them. That this effect was most pronounced in black
kids in segregated schools was cited in Brown v. Board of Education.*
Roughly 40 to 50 percent of African Americans, gays and lesbians, and
women show automatic IAT biases in favor of whites, heterosexuals, and
men, respectively.
Some of My Best Friends
The “honorable enemy” phenomenon raises another domain of
human peculiarity. Even if he could, no chimp would ever deny that the
neighboring chimps remind him of spiders. None would feel bad about
416