suggesting that genes were pertinent to violence. This suspicion of
gene/behavior links exists because of the pseudoscientific genetics used
to justify various “isms,” prejudice, and discrimination. Such
pseudoscience has fostered racism and sexism, birthed eugenics and
forced sterilizations, allowed scientifically meaningless versions of
words like “innate” to justify the neglect of have-nots. And monstrous
distortions of genetics have fueled those who lynch, ethnically cleanse,
or march children into gas chambers.*1
But studying the genetics of behavior also carries the opposite burden
of people who are overly enthusiastic about the subject. After all, this is
the genomics era, with personalized genomic medicine, people getting
their genomes sequenced, and popular writing about genomics giddy
with terms like “the holy grail” and “the code of codes.” In a reductionist
view, understanding something complex requires breaking it down into
its components; understand those parts, add them together, and you’ll
understand the big picture. And in this reductionist world, to understand
cells, organs, bodies, and behavior, the best constituent part to study is
genes.
Overenthusiasm for genes can reflect a sense that people possess an
immutable, distinctive essence (although essentialism predates
genomics). Consider a study concerning “moral spillover” based on
kinship.2 Suppose a person harmed people two generations ago; are this
person’s grandchildren obliged to help his victims’ grandchildren?
Subjects viewed a biological grandchild as more obligated than one
adopted into the family at birth; the biological relationship carried a taint.
Moreover, subjects were more willing to jail two long-lost identical
twins for a crime committed by one of them than to jail two unrelated but
perfect look-alikes—the former, raised in different environments, share a
moral taint because of their identical genes. People see essentialism
embedded in bloodlines—i.e., genes.*
This chapter threads between these two extremes, concluding that
while genes are important to this book’s concerns, they’re far less so than
often thought. The chapter first introduces gene function and regulation,
showing the limits of genes’ power. Next it examines genetic influences
on behavior in general. Finally we’ll examine genetic influences on our
best and worst behaviors.
226