How does this work? Rodents produce pheromonal odors with
individual signatures, derived from genes called the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC). This is a super variable gene cluster
that produces unique proteins that form a signature for an individual.
This was first studied by immunologists. What does the immune system
do? It differentiates between you and invaders—“self” and “nonself”—
and attacks the latter. All your cells carry your unique MHC-derived
protein, and surveillance immune cells attack any cell lacking this
protein password. And MHC-derived proteins also wind up in
pheromones, producing a distinctive olfactory signature.
This system can indicate that this mouse is John Smith. How does it
also tell that he’s your never-before-encountered brother? The closer the
relative, the more similar their cluster of MHC genes and the more
similar their olfactory signature. Olfactory neurons in a mouse contain
receptors that respond most strongly to the mouse’s own MHC protein.
Thus, if the receptor is maximally stimulated, it means the mouse is
sniffing its armpit. If near maximally stimulated, it’s a close relative.
Moderately, a distant relative. Not at all (though the MHC protein is
being detected by other olfactory receptors), it’s a hippo’s armpit.*
Olfactory recognition of kin accounts for a fascinating phenomenon.
Recall from chapter 5 how the adult brain makes new neurons. In rats,
pregnancy triggers neurogenesis in the olfactory system. Why there? So
that olfactory recognition is in top form when it’s time to recognize your
newborn; if the neurogenesis doesn’t occur, maternal behavior is
impaired.25
Then there is kin recognition based on imprinted sensory cues. How
do I know which newborn to nurse? The one who smells like my vaginal
fluid. Which kid do I hang out near? The one who smells like Mom’s
milk. Many ungulates use such rules. So do birds. Which bird do I know
is Mom? The bird whose distinctive song I learned before hatching.
And there are species that figure out relatedness by reasoning; my
guess is that male baboons make statistical inferences when identifying
their likely offspring: “How much of this mom’s peak estrus swelling
was spent with me? All. Okay, this is my kid; act accordingly.” Which
brings us to the most cognitively strategic species, namely us. How do
we do kin recognition? In ways that are far from accurate, with
interesting consequences.
344