Similarly, we expect that our best, most prosocial acts be
warmhearted, filled with positive affect. Cold-blooded goodness seems
oxymoronic, is unsettling. I was once at a conference of neuroscientists
and all-star Buddhist monk meditators, the former studying what the
brains of the latter did during meditation. One scientist asked one of the
monks whether he ever stops meditating because his knees hurt from all
that cross-leggedness. He answered, “Sometimes I’ll stop sooner than I
planned, but not because it hurts; it’s not something I notice. It’s as an act
of kindness to my knees.” “Whoa,” I thought, “these guys are from
another planet.” A cool, commendable one, but another planet
nonetheless. Crimes of passion and good acts of passion make the most
sense to us (nevertheless, as we shall see, dispassionate kindness often
has much to recommend it).
Hot-blooded badness, warmhearted goodness, and the unnerving
incongruity of the cold-blooded versions raise a key point, encapsulated
in a quote from Elie Wiesel, the Nobel Peace Prize winner and
concentration camp survivor: “The opposite of love is not hate; its
opposite is indifference.” The biologies of strong love and strong hate
are similar in many ways, as we’ll see.
Which reminds us that we don’t hate aggression; we hate the wrong
kind of aggression but love it in the right context. And conversely, in the
wrong context our most laudable behaviors are anything but. The
motoric features of our behaviors are less important and challenging to
understand than the meaning behind our muscles’ actions.
This is shown in a subtle study.7 Subjects in a brain scanner entered a
virtual room where they encountered either an injured person in need of
help or a menacing extraterrestrial; subjects could either bandage or
shoot the individual. Pulling a trigger and applying a bandage are
different behaviors. But they are similar, insofar as bandaging the injured
person and shooting the alien are both the “right” things. And
contemplating those two different versions of doing the right thing
activated the same circuitry in the most context-savvy part of the brain,
the prefrontal cortex.
And thus those key terms that anchor this book are most difficult to
define because of their profound context dependency. I will therefore
group them in a way that reflects this. I won’t frame the behaviors to
come as either pro- or antisocial—too cold-blooded for my expository
tastes. Nor will they be labeled as “good” and “evil”—too hot-blooded
23