stimulation into recognizable images before it can scream to the
amygdala, “It’s a gun!” Importantly, some sensory information entering
the brain takes a shortcut, bypassing the cortex and going directly to the
amygdala. Thus the amygdala can be informed about something scary
before the cortex has a clue. Moreover, thanks to the extreme excitability
of this pathway, the amygdala can respond to stimuli that are too fleeting
or faint for the cortex to note. Additionally, the shortcut projections form
stronger, more excitable synapses in the BLA than do the ones from the
sensory cortex; emotional arousal enhances fear conditioning through
this pathway. This shortcut’s power is shown in the case of a man with
stroke damage to his visual cortex, producing “cortical blindness.” While
unable to process most visual information, he still recognized emotional
facial expressions via the shortcut.*
Crucially, while sensory information reaches the amygdala rapidly by
this shortcut, it isn’t terribly accurate (since, after all, accuracy is what
the cortex supplies). As we’ll see in the next chapter, this produces tragic
circumstances where, say, the amygdala decides it’s seeing a handgun
before the visual cortex can report that it’s actually a cell phone.
Information about pain. The amygdala receives news of that reliable
trigger of fear and aggression, namely pain.27 This is mediated by
projections from an ancient, core brain structure, the “periaqueductal
gray” (PAG); stimulation of the PAG can evoke panic attacks, and it is
enlarged in people with chronic panic attacks. Reflecting the amygdala’s
roles in vigilance, uncertainty, anxiety, and fear, it’s unpredictable pain,
rather than pain itself, that activates the amygdala. Pain (and the
amygdala’s response to it) is all about context.
Disgust of all stripes. The amygdala also receives a hugely interesting
projection from the “insular cortex,” an honorary part of the prefrontal
cortex, which we will consider at length in later chapters.28 If you (or
any other mammal) bite into rancid food, the insular cortex lights up,
causing you to spit it out, gag, feel nauseated, make a revolted facial
expression—the insular cortex processes gustatory disgust. Ditto for
disgusting smells.
Remarkably, humans also activate it by thinking about something
morally disgusting—social norm violations or individuals who are
typically stigmatized in society. And in that circumstance its activation
drives that of the amygdala. Someone does something lousy and selfish
to you in a game, and the extent of insular and amygdaloid activation
45