emanating from the previous neuron in line. As a result, channels open
and ions flow in and out of that one dendrite. But only a little bit. Not
enough to make the entire inside of the neuron positively charged,
simply a little less negatively charged just inside that dendrite (just to
attach some numbers here that don’t matter in the slightest, the resting
potential charge shifts from around –70 millivolts to around –60
millivolts). Then the channels close. That little hiccup of becoming less
negative* spreads farther up the shaft of that dendrite. The pumps have
started working, pumping ions back to where they were in the first place.
So at the end of that dendritic fibril, the charge went from –70 to –60
mV. But a little bit up the shaft of that fibril, things then go from –70 to –
65 mV. Farther up the shaft, –70 to –69. In other words, that excitatory
signal dissipates. You’ve taken a nice smooth calm lake, in its resting
state, and tossed a little pebble in. It causes a bit of a ripple right there,
which spreads outward, getting smaller in its magnitude, until it
dissipates not far from where the pebble hit. And miles away, at the
lake’s axonal end, that ripple of excitation has had no effect whatsoever.
In other words, if a single dendritic fibril is excited, that’s not enough
to pass on the excitation down to the axonal end and on to the next
neuron. How does a message ever get passed on? Back to that wonderful
drawing of a neuron by Cajal here.
That arborized array of bifurcating dendritic branches ends in lots of
ends of fibrils (time to introduce the term commonly used: “ends in lots
of dendritic spines”). And in order to get sufficient excitation to sweep
from the dendritic end of the neuron to the axonal end, you have to have
summation—the same spine must be stimulated repeatedly and/or, more
commonly, a bunch of the spinal neurons must be stimulated at once.
You can’t get a wave, rather than just a ripple, unless you throw in a lot
of pebbles.
At the base of the axon, where it emerges from the cell body, is a
specialized part (called the axon “hillock”). If all those summated
dendritic inputs produce enough of a ripple to move the resting potential
around the hillock from –70 mV to around –40 mV, a threshold is
passed. And once that happens, all hell breaks loose. A different class of
channels opens in the membrane of the hillock, which allows a massive
migration of ions, producing, finally, a positive charge (about 30 mV). In
other words, an action potential. Which then opens up those same types
of channels in the next smidgen of axonal membrane, regenerating the
684