will. In the words of philosopher Hilary Bok, “The claim that a person
chose her action does not conflict with the claim that some neural
processes or states caused it; it simply redescribes it.”23
This is a point I’ve made throughout the book, namely that
description and correlation are nice, but actual causal data are the gold
standard (e.g., “When you raise the levels of neurotransmitter X,
behavior Z happens more often”). That is the source of some of our most
powerful demonstrations of the material bases of our more complex
behaviors—for example, transcranial magnetic stimulation techniques
that transiently activate or inactivate a part of the cortex can change
someone’s moral decision making, decisions about punishment, or levels
of generosity and empathy. That’s causality.
It is when we get to the issue of causality that Morse distinguishes
between causation and compulsion. He writes, “Causation is neither an
excuse per se nor the equivalent of compulsion, which is an excusing
condition.” Morse describes himself as a “thoroughgoing materialist”
and states, “We live in a causal universe, which includes human action.”
But try as I might, I cannot see any way of making this distinction that
does not tacitly require a homunculus that is outside the causal universe,
a homunculus that can be overwhelmed by “compulsion” but that can
and should handle “causation.” In the words of philosopher Shaun
Nichols, “It seems like something has to give, either our commitment to
free will or our commitment to the idea that every event is completely
caused by the preceding events.”24
Despite these criticisms of his criticisms, my stance has a major
problem, one that causes Morse to conclude that the contributions of
neuroscience to the legal system “are modest at best and neuroscience
poses no genuine, radical challenges to concepts of personhood,
responsibility, and competence.”25 The problem can be summarized in a
hypothetical exchange:
Prosecutor: So, professor, you’ve told us about the extensive
damage that the defendant sustained to his frontal cortex when he
was a child. Has every person who has sustained such damage
become a multiple murderer, like the defendant?
Neuroscientist testifying for the defense: No.
Prosecutor: Has every such person at least engaged in some
sort of serious criminal behavior?
601