aggressive behaviors. They concluded that these structures, soon termed
the “limbic system” (for obscure reasons), were about emotion.
Rhinencephalon or limbic system? Olfaction or emotion? Pitched
street battles ensued until someone pointed out the obvious—for a rat,
emotion and olfaction are nearly synonymous, since nearly all the
environmental stimuli that elicit emotions in a rodent are olfactory. Peace
in our time. In a rodent, olfactory inputs are what the limbic system most
depends on for emotional news of the world. In contrast, the primate
limbic system is more informed by visual inputs.
Limbic function is now recognized as central to the emotions that
fuel our best and worst behaviors, and extensive research has uncovered
the functions of its structures (e.g., the amygdala, hippocampus, septum,
habenula, and mammillary bodies).
There really aren’t “centers” in the brain “for” particular behaviors.
This is particularly the case with the limbic system and emotion. There is
indeed a sub-subregion of the motor cortex that approximates being the
“center” for making your left pinkie bend; other regions have “center”-
ish roles in regulating breathing or body temperature. But there sure
aren’t centers for feeling pissy or horny, for feeling bittersweet nostalgia
or warm protectiveness tinged with contempt, or for that what-is-that-
thing-called-love feeling. No surprise, then, that the circuitry connecting
various limbic structures is immensely complex.
The Autonomic Nervous System and the Ancient
Core Regions of the Brain
The limbic system’s regions form complex circuits of excitation and
inhibition. It’s easier to understand this by appreciating the deeply held
desire of every limbic structure—to influence what the hypothalamus
does.
Why? Because of its importance. The hypothalamus, a limbic
structure, is the interface between layers 1 and 2, between core
regulatory and emotional parts of the brain.
Consistent with that, the hypothalamus gets massive inputs from
limbic layer 2 structures but disproportionately sends projections to layer
1 regions. These are the evolutionarily ancient midbrain and brain stem,
which regulate automatic reactions throughout the body.
30