Eldredge and Gould focused on there being plenty of fossil records
that were complete chronologically (for example, trilobites and snails,
Eldredge’s and Gould’s specialties, respectively) and didn’t show
gradualism. Instead there were long periods of stasis, of unchanged
fossils, and then, in a paleontological blink of an eye, there’d be a rapid
transition to a very different form. Maybe evolution is mostly like this,
they argued. What triggers punctuated events of sudden change? A
sudden, massive selective factor that kills most of a species, the only
survivors being ones with some obscure genetic trait that turned out to be
vital—an “evolutionary bottleneck.”
Why does punctuated equilibrium challenge sociobiological
thinking? Sociobiological gradualism implies that every smidgen of
difference in fitness counts, that every slight advantage of one individual
over another at leaving copies of genes in future generations translates
into evolutionary change. At every juncture, optimizing competition,
cooperation, aggression, parental investment, all of it, is evolutionarily
consequential. And if instead there is mostly evolutionary stasis, much of
this chapter becomes mostly irrelevant.*
The sociobiologists were not amused. They called the punctuated
equilibrium people “jerks” (while the punctuated equilibrium people
called them “creeps”—get it? PE = evolution in a series of jerks;
sociobiology = evolution as a gradual, creeping process).* Gradualist
sociobiologists responded with strong rebuttals, taking a number of
forms:
They’re just snail shells. First, there are some very complete fossil
lineages that are gradualist. And don’t forget, said the gradualists, these
punctuated equilibrium guys are talking about trilobite and snail fossils.
The fossil record we’re most interested in—primates, hominins—is too
spotty to tell if it is gradualist or punctuated.
How fast do their eyes blink? Next, said the gradualists, remember,
these punctuated equilibrium fans are paleontologists. They see long
periods of stasis and then extremely rapid blink-of-the-eye changes in the
fossil record. But with fossils the blink of an eye, a stretch of time
unresolvably short in the fossil record, could be 50,000 to 100,000 years.
That’s plenty of time for evolution bloody in tooth and claw to happen.
This is only a partial refutation, since if a paleontological blink of the eye
is so long, paleontological stasis is humongously long.
378