community in which most people answer yes is one with fewer locks,
with people watching out for one another’s kids and intervening in
situations where one could easily look away. The second question is how
many organizations someone participates in—from the purely
recreational (e.g., a bowling league) to the vital (e.g., unions, tenant
groups, co-op banks). A community with high levels of such
participation is one where people feel efficacious, where institutions
work transparently enough that people believe they can effect change.
People who feel helpless don’t join organizations.
Put simply, cultures with more income inequality have less social
capital.35 Trust requires reciprocity, and reciprocity requires equality,
whereas hierarchy is about domination and asymmetry. Moreover, a
culture highly unequal in material resources is almost always also
unequal in the ability to pull the strings of power, to have efficacy, to be
visible. (For example, as income inequality grows, the percentage of
people who bother voting generally declines.) Almost by definition, you
can’t have a society with both dramatic income inequality and plentiful
social capital. Or translated from social science–ese, marked inequality
makes people crummier to one another.
This can be shown in various ways, studied on the levels of
Westernized countries, states, provinces, cities, and towns. The more
income inequality, the less likely people are to help someone (in an
experimental setting) and the less generous and cooperative they are in
economic games. Early in the chapter, I discussed cross-cultural rates of
bullying and of “antisocial punishment,” where people in economic
games punish overly generous players more than they punish cheaters.*
Studies of these phenomena show that high levels of inequality and/or
low levels of social capital in a country predict high rates of bullying and
of antisocial punishment.36
Chapter 11 examines the psychology with which we think about
people of different socioeconomic status; no surprise, in unequal
societies, people on top generate justifications for their status.37 And the
more inequality, the more the powerful adhere to myths about the hidden
blessings of subordination—“They may be poor, but at least they’re
happy/honest/loved.” In the words of the authors of one paper, “Unequal
societies may need ambivalence for system stability: Income inequality
compensates groups with partially positive social images.”
292