Criticism #4: Adoption studies assume that a child and adoptive parents
share environment but not genes.25 That might approach being true if
adoption involved choosing adoptive parents randomly among everyone
on earth. Instead, adoption agencies prefer to place children with families
of similar racial or ethnic background as the biological parents (a policy
advocated by the National Association of Black Social Workers and the
Child Welfare League).* Thus, kids and adoptive parents typically share
genes at a higher-than-chance level; if this isn’t recognized, a similarity
between them will be misattributed to environment.
Researchers admit there is selective placement but argue over
whether it’s consequential. This remains unsettled. Bouchard, with his
twins separated at birth, controlled for cultural, material, and
technological similarities between the separate homes of twin pairs,
concluding that shared similarity of home environments due to selective
placement was a negligible factor. A similar conclusion was reached in a
larger study carried out by both Kendler and another dean of the field,
Robert Plomin of King’s College London.
These conclusions have been challenged. The most fire-breathing
critic has been Princeton psychologist Leon Kamin, who argues that
concluding that selective placement isn’t important is wrong because of
misinterpretation of results, use of wimpy analytical tests, and
overreliance on questionable retrospective data. He wrote: “We suggest
that no scientific purpose is served by the flood of heritability estimates
generated by these studies.”26
Here’s where I give up—if super smart people who think about this
issue all the time can’t agree, I sure don’t know how seriously selective
placement distorts the literature.
Criticism #5: Adoptive parents tend to be more educated, wealthier, and
more psychiatrically healthy than biological parents.27 Thus, adoptive
households show “range restriction,” being more homogeneous than
biological ones, which decreases the ability to detect environmental
effects on behavior. Predictably, attempts to control for this satisfy only
some critics.
—
So what do we know after this slog through the criticisms and
countercriticisms about adoption and twin studies?
240