differentiation between recommended punishment for intentional and
unintentional damage to objects. In other words, the salient point about
the damage becomes that, accidental or otherwise, the damn thing needs
to be fixed—even if there is less crying over spilled milk, there is no less
cleaning required.*
What about one of the greatest things about adolescents, with respect
to this book’s concerns—their frenzied, agitated, incandescent ability to
feel someone else’s pain, to feel everyone’s pain, to try to make
everything right? A later chapter distinguishes between sympathy and
empathy—between feeling for someone in pain and feeling as that
someone. Adolescents are specialists at the latter, where the intensity of
feeling as the other can border on being the other.
This intensity is no surprise, being at the intersection of many facets
of adolescence. There are the abundant emotions and limbic gyrations.
The highs are higher, the lows lower, empathic pain scalds, and the glow
of doing the right thing makes it seem plausible that we are here for a
purpose. Another contributing factor is the openness to novelty. An open
mind is a prerequisite for an open heart, and the adolescent hunger for
new experiences makes possible walking miles in lots of other people’s
shoes. And there is the egoism of adolescence. During my late
adolescence I hung out with Quakers, and they’d occasionally use the
aphorism “All God has is thee.” This is the God of limited means, not
just needing the help of humans to right a wrong, but needing you, you
only, to do so. The appeal to egoism is tailor-made for adolescents.
Throw in inexhaustible adolescent energy plus a feeling of omnipotence,
and it seems possible to make the world whole, so why not?
In chapter 13 we consider how neither the most burning emotional
capacity for empathy nor the most highfalutin moral reasoning makes
someone likely to actually do the brave, difficult thing. This raises a
subtle limitation of adolescent empathy.
As will be seen, one instance where empathic responses don’t
necessarily lead to acts is when we think enough to rationalize (“It’s
overblown as a problem” or “Someone else will fix it”). But feeling too
much has problems as well. Feeling someone else’s pain is painful, and
people who do so most strongly, with the most pronounced arousal and
anxiety, are actually less likely to act prosocially. Instead the personal
distress induces a self-focus that prompts avoidance—“This is too awful;
166