The vmPFC is not the vestigial appendix of the frontal cortex, where
emotion is something akin to appendicitis, inflaming a sensible brain.
Instead it’s essential.64 It wouldn’t be if we had evolved into Vulcans.
But as long as the world is filled with humans, evolution would never
have made us that way.
Activation of the dlPFC and vmPFC can be inversely correlated. In
an inspired study where a keyboard was provided to jazz pianists inside a
brain scanner, the vmPFC became more active and the dlPFC less so
when subjects improvised. In another study, subjects judged hypothetical
harmful acts. Pondering perpetrators’ responsibility activated the dlPFC;
deciding the amount of punishment activated the vmPFC.* When
subjects did a gambling task where reward probabilities for various
strategies shifted and they could always change strategies, decision
making reflected two factors: (a) the outcome of their most recent action
(the better that had turned out, the more vmPFC activation), and (b)
reward rates from all the previous rounds, something requiring a long
retrospective view (the better the long-term rewards, the more dlPFC
activation). Relative activation between the two regions predicted the
decision subjects made.65
A simplistic view is that the vmPFC and dlPFC perpetually battle for
domination by emotion versus cognition. But while emotion and
cognition can be somewhat separable, they’re rarely in opposition.
Instead they are intertwined in a collaborative relationship needed for
normal function, and as tasks with both emotive and cognitive
components become more difficult (making an increasingly complex
economic decision in a setting that is increasingly unfair), activity in the
two structures becomes more synchronized.
The Frontal Cortex and Its Relationship with the
Limbic System
We now have a sense of what different subdivisions of the PFC do
and how cognition and emotion interact neurobiologically. This leads us
to consider how the frontal cortex and limbic system interact.
In landmark studies Joshua Greene of Harvard and Princeton’s
Cohen showed how the “emotional” and “cognitive” parts of the brain
can somewhat dissociate.66 They used philosophy’s famous “runaway
60