an affront to the collective population—hence “The People Versus Joe
Blow.”*44
Finally, life in larger populations fosters the ultimate third-party
punisher. As documented by Ara Norenzayan of the University of British
Columbia, it is only when societies grow large enough that people
regularly encounter strangers that “Big Gods” emerge—deities who are
concerned with human morality and punish our transgressions.45
Societies with frequent anonymous interactions tend to outsource
punishment to gods.* In contrast, hunter-gatherers’ gods are less likely
than chance to care whether we’ve been naughty or nice. Moreover, in
further work across a range of traditional cultures, Norenzayan has
shown that the more informed and punitive people consider their
moralistic gods to be, the more generous they are to coreligionist
strangers in a financial allocation game.
Separate from the size of a population, how about its density? One
study surveying thirty-three developed countries characterized each
nation’s “tightness”—the extent to which the government is autocratic,
dissent suppressed, behavior monitored, transgressions punished, life
regulated by religious orthodoxy, citizens viewing various behaviors as
inappropriate (e.g., singing in an elevator, cursing at a job interview).46
Higher population density predicted tighter cultures—both high density
in the present and, remarkably, historically, in the year 1500.
The issue of population density’s effects on behavior gave rise to a
well-known phenomenon, mostly well known incorrectly.
In the 1950s John Calhoun at the National Institute of Mental Health
asked what happens to rat behavior at higher population densities,
research prompted by America’s ever-growing cities.47 And in papers for
both scientists and the lay public, Calhoun gave a clear answer: high-
density living produced “deviant” behavior and “social pathology.” Rats
became violent; adults killed and cannibalized one another; females were
aggressive to their infants; there was indiscriminate hypersexuality
among males (e.g., trying to mate with females who weren’t in estrus).
The writing about the subject, starting with Calhoun, was colorful.
The bloodless description of “high-density living” was replaced with
“crowding.” Aggressive males were described as “going berserk,”
aggressive females as “Amazons.” Rats living in these “rat slums”
became “social dropouts,” “autistic,” or “juvenile delinquents.” One
expert on rat behavior, A. S. Parkes, described Calhoun’s rats as
297