brain that rapidly intuits abstractions. And we can also perceive the
building blocks in someone who is merely okay, or lousy, at any of these.
But Rudolph-esque accomplishments seem different. You’re
exhausted, demoralized, and it hurts like hell but you push on; you want
to take an evening off, see a movie with a friend, but resume studying;
there’s that temptation, no one’s looking, everyone else does it, but you
know it’s wrong. It seems so hard, so improbable to think of those same
neurotransmitters, receptors, or transcription factors when considering
feats of willpower. There seems a much easier answer—you’re seeing
the Calvinist work ethic of a homunculus sprinkled with the right kind of
fairy dust.
Here’s a great example of this dualism. Recall Jerry Sandusky, the
Penn State football coach who was a horrific serial child molester. After
his conviction came an opinion piece on CNN. Writing under the
provocative heading of “Do pedophiles deserve sympathy?” James
Cantor of the University of Toronto reviewed the neurobiology of
pedophilia. For example, it runs in families in ways suggesting genes
play a role. Pedophiles have atypically high rates of brain injuries during
childhood. There’s evidence of endocrine abnormalities during fetal life.
Does this raise the possibility that a neurobiological die is cast, that some
people are destined to be this way? Precisely. Cantor concludes, “One
cannot choose to not be a pedophile.”21
Brave and correct. And then Cantor does a stunning mitigated-free-
will long jump. Does any of that biology lessen the condemnation and
punishment that Sandusky deserved? No. “One cannot choose to not be a
pedophile, but one can choose to not be a child molester.”
This establishes a dichotomy of what things are supposedly made of:
Biological stuff Homuncular grit
Destructive sexual urges Resisting acting upon them
Delusionally hearing voices Resisting their destructive commands
Proclivity toward alcoholism Not drinking
Having epileptic seizures Not driving if you didn’t take your meds
Not all that bright Getting going when the going gets tough
Not the loveliest of faces Resisting getting that huge, hideous nose ring
Here are just a few of the things we’ve seen in this book that can
influence the column on the right: blood glucose levels; the
598