Levels of aggression rise in rodents during pregnancy, peaking
around parturition.*48 Appropriately, the highest levels occur in species
and breeds with the greatest threat of infanticide.49
During late pregnancy, estrogen and progesterone increase maternal
aggression by increasing oxytocin release in certain brain regions,
bringing us back to oxytocin promoting maternal aggression.50
Two complications illustrate some endocrine principles.* Estrogen
contributes to maternal aggression. But estrogen can also reduce
aggression and enhance empathy and emotional recognition. It turns out
there are two different types of receptors for estrogen in the brain,
mediating these opposing effects and with their levels independently
regulated. Thus, same hormone, same levels, different outcome if the
brain is set up to respond differently.51
The other complication: As noted, progesterone, working with
estrogen, promotes maternal aggression. However, on its own it
decreases aggression and anxiety. Same hormone, same levels,
diametrically opposite outcomes depending on the presence of a second
hormone.52
Progesterone decreases anxiety through a thoroughly cool route.
When it enters neurons, it is converted to another steroid;* this binds to
GABA receptors, making them more sensitive to the inhibitory effects of
GABA, thereby calming the brain. Thus, direct cross-talk between
hormones and neurotransmitters.
Bare-Knuckled Female Aggression
The traditional view is that other than maternal aggression, any
female-female competition is passive, covert. As noted by the pioneering
primatologist Sarah Blaffer Hrdy of the University of California at
Davis, before the 1970s hardly anyone even researched competition
among females.53
Nevertheless, there is plenty of female-female aggression. This is
often dismissed with a psychopathology argument—if, say, a female
chimp is murderous, it’s because, well, she’s crazy. Or female aggression
is viewed as endocrine “spillover.”54 Females synthesize small amounts
of androgens in the adrenals and ovaries; in the spillover view, the
process of synthesizing “real” female steroid hormones is somewhat
116