in turn encourage us to think of empathy as an end in itself rather
than part of a process, a catalyst.46
In such a situation, saying “I feel your pain,” becomes a New Age
equivalent of the unhelpful bureaucrat saying, “Look, I sympathize with
your situation, but . . .” The former is so detached from action that it
doesn’t even require the “but” as a bridge to the “there’s nothing I
can/will do.” Having your pain validated is swell; having it alleviated is
better.
And there’s a broader reason why an empathic state may not produce
action, first raised in chapter 6 when considering those strange creatures,
adolescents. In that discussion I emphasized a wonderful feature of so
many adolescents, namely the frenzied feeling of the world’s pains, but
noted how that intensity often leads to little more than frenzied self-
absorption. If instead of imagining how someone else is feeling (an
other-oriented perspective), you are imagining how it would feel if this
were happening to you (a self-oriented perspective), “you” has just come
to the forefront and the main point is that feeling someone’s pain feels
painful.
The biological substrates of this are clear. Look at someone in pain
with the instruction to take a self-oriented perspective, and the amygdala,
ACC, and insular cortex activate, along with reports of distress and
anxiety. Do the same with an other-oriented perspective, and all are less
likely. And the more extreme the former state, the more likely that
someone’s focus will be to lessen their own distress, to metaphorically
look the other way.47
This can be predicted with remarkable ease. Expose subjects to
evidence of someone else in pain. If their heart rate increases a lot (a
peripheral indicator of anxious, amygdaloid arousal), they are unlikely to
act prosocially in the situation. The prosocial ones are those whose heart
rates decrease; they can hear the sound of someone else’s need instead of
the distressed pounding in their own chests.*48
Thus, if feeling your pain makes me feel awful, I’m likely to just
look out for number one, rather than helping you. Likewise if you’ve got
your own issues. We saw this earlier, with the demonstration that if you
increase people’s cognitive load, they become less prosocial toward
strangers. Similarly, when people are hungry, they are less charitable—
hey, quit bellyaching about your problems; my belly is aching. Make
542