The Serotonin System
What do genes related to serotonin have to do with our best and
worst behaviors? Plenty.
Chapter 2 presented a fairly clear picture of low levels of serotonin
fostering impulsive antisocial behavior. There are lower-than-average
levels of serotonin breakdown products in the bloodstreams of people
with that profile, and of serotonin itself in the frontal cortex of such
animals. Even more convincingly, drugs that decrease “serotonergic
tone” (i.e., decreasing serotonin levels or sensitivity to serotonin)
increase impulsive aggression; raising the tone does the opposite.
This generates some simple predictions—all of the following should
be associated with impulsive aggression, as they will produce low
serotonin signaling:
a. Low-activity variants of the gene for tryptophan
hydroxylase (TH), which makes serotonin
b. High-activity variants of the gene for monoamine
oxidase-A (MAO-A), which degrades serotonin
c. High-activity variants of the gene for the serotonin
transporter (5HTT), which removes serotonin from the
synapse
d. Variants of genes for serotonin receptors that are less
sensitive to serotonin
An extensive literature shows that for each of those genes the results
are inconsistent and generally go in the opposite direction from “low
serotonin = aggression” dogma. Ugh.
Studies of genes for TH and serotonin receptors are inconsistent
messes.38 In contrast, the picture of 5HTT, the serotonin transporter
gene, is consistently in the opposite direction from what’s expected. Two
variants exist, with one producing less transporter protein, meaning less
serotonin removed from the synapse.* And counter to expectations, this
variant, producing more serotonin in the synapse, is associated with more
impulsive aggression, not less. Thus, according to these findings, “high
serotonin = aggression” (recognizing this as simplified shorthand).
The clearest and most counterintuitive studies concern MAO-A. It
burst on the scene in a hugely influential 1993 Science paper reporting a
251