Suppose, instead, that tactile receptors in the hand are destroyed, no
longer projecting to those sensory cortical neurons. Neurons abhor a
vacuum, and tactile neurons in the wrist may sprout collateral axonal
branches and expand their territory into that neglected cortical region.
Consider blindness due to retinal degeneration, where the projections to
the visual cortex are silenced. As described, fingertip tactile neurons
involved in reading Braille sprout projections into the visual cortex,
setting up camp there. Or suppose there is a pseudoinjury: after merely
five days of subjects being blindfolded, auditory projections start to
remap into the visual cortex (and retract once the blindfolds come off).14
Consider how fingertip tactile neurons carrying information about
Braille remap to the visual cortex in someone blind. The sensory cortex
and visual cortex are far away from each other. How do those tactile
neurons “know” (a) that there’s vacant property in the visual cortex; (b)
that hooking up with those unoccupied neurons helps turn fingertip
information into “reading”; and (c) how to send axonal projections to
this new cortical continent? All are matters of ongoing research.
What happens in a blind person when auditory projection neurons
expand their target range into the inactive visual cortex? More acute
hearing—the brain can respond to deficits in one realm with
compensations in another.
So sensory projection neurons can remap. And once, say, visual
cortex neurons are processing Braille in a blind person, those neurons
need to remap where they project to, triggering further downstream
remapping. Waves of plasticity.
Remapping occurs regularly throughout the brain in the absence of
injury. My favorite examples concern musicians, who have larger
auditory cortical representation of musical sounds than do nonmusicians,
particularly for the sound of their own instrument, as well as for
detecting pitch in speech; the younger the person begins being a
musician, the stronger the remapping.15
Such remapping does not require decades of practice, as shown in
beautiful work by Alvaro Pascual-Leone at Harvard.16 Nonmusician
volunteers learned a five-finger exercise on the piano, which they
practiced for two hours a day. Within a few days the amount of motor
cortex devoted to the movement of that hand expanded, but the
expansion lasted less than a day without further practice. This expansion
was probably “Hebbian” in nature, meaning preexisting connections
142