Or how much do genes help in explaining why humans usually enjoy
ice cream? How much in explaining why people like different flavors?
These issues utilize two terms with similar sounds but different
meanings. If genes strongly influence average levels of a trait, that trait is
strongly inherited. If genes strongly influence the extent of variability
around that average level, that trait has high heritability.* It is a
population measure, where a heritability score indicates the percentage
of total variation attributable to genetics.
The difference between an inherited trait and heritability generates at
least two problems that inflate the putative influence of genes. First,
people confuse the two terms (things would be easier if heritability were
called something like “gene tendency”), and in a consistent direction.
People often mistakenly believe that if a trait is strongly inherited, it’s
thus highly heritable. And it’s particularly bad that confusion is typically
in that direction, because people are usually more interested in variability
of traits among humans than in average levels of traits. For example, it’s
more interesting to consider why some people are smarter than others
than why humans are smarter than turnips.
The second problem is that research consistently inflates heritability
measures, leading people to conclude that genes influence individual
differences more than they do.
Let’s slowly work through this, because it’s really important.
The Difference Between a Trait Being Inherited
and Having a High Degree of Heritability
You can appreciate the difference by considering cases where they
dissociate.
First, an example of a trait that is highly inherited but has low
heritability, offered by the philosopher Ned Block:29 What do genes have
to do with humans averaging five fingers per hand? Tons; it’s an
inherited trait. What do genes have to do with variation around that
average? Not much—cases of other than five fingers on a hand are
mostly due to accidents. While average finger number is an inherited
trait, the heritability of finger number is low—genes don’t explain
individual differences much. Or stated differently: Say you want to guess
whether some organism’s limb has five fingers or a hoof. Knowing their
242