concerning moral truth, only because of the fierce moral reasoning (and
activism) of those who came before us, when the average person’s moral
intuitions were unrecognizably different. Our guts learn their intuitions.
Slow and Fast: The Separate Problems of “Me
Versus Us” and “Us Versus Them”
The contrast between rapid, automatic moral intuitionism and
conscious, deliberative moral reasoning plays out in another crucial
realm and is the subject of Greene’s superb 2014 book Moral Tribes:
Emotion, Reason, and the Gap Between Us and Them.33
Greene starts with the classic tragedy of the commons. Shepherds
bring their flocks to a common grazing field. There are so many sheep
that there is the danger of destroying the commons, unless people
decrease the size of their herds. And the tragedy is that if it is truly a
commons, there is no incentive to ever cooperate—you’d range from
being a fool if no one else was cooperating to being a successful free
rider if everyone else was.
This issue, namely how to jump-start and then maintain cooperation
in a sea of noncooperators, ran through all of chapter 10 and, as shown in
the widespread existence of social species that cooperate, this is solvable
(stay tuned for more in the final chapter). When framed in the context of
morality, averting the tragedy of the commons requires getting people in
groups to not be selfish; it is an issue of Me versus Us.
But Greene outlines a second type of tragedy. Now there are two
different groups of shepherds, and the challenge is that each group has a
different approach to grazing. One, for example, treats the pasture as a
classic commons, while the other believes that the pasture should be
divided up into parcels of land belonging to individual shepherds, with
high, strong fences in between. In other words, mutually contradictory
views about using the pasture.
The thing that fuels the danger and tragedy of this situation is that
each group has such a tightly reasoned structure in their heads as to why
their way is correct that it can acquire moral weight, be seen as a “right.”
Greene dissects that word brilliantly. For each side, perceiving
themselves as having a “right” to do things their way mostly means that
they have slathered enough post-hoc, Haidtian rationalizations on a
508