that make for a stable replicator. But people select for taste, not recipe,
say the phenotypists, and taste reflects more than just the recipe—after
all, there are recipe/environment interactions where bakers differ in their
skill levels, cakes bake differently at various altitudes, etc. The recipe-
versus-taste question can be framed practically: Your cake company isn’t
selling enough cakes. Do you change the recipe or the baker?
Can’t we all get along? There’s the obvious bleeding-heart answer,
namely that there’s room for a range of views and mechanisms in our
rainbow-colored tent of evolutionary diversity. Different circumstances
bring different levels of selection to the forefront. Sometimes the most
informative level is the single gene, sometimes the genome, sometimes a
single phenotypic trait, sometimes the collection of all the organism’s
phenotypic traits.44 We’ve just arrived at the reasonable idea of
multilevel selection.
The Resurrection of Group Selection
Hooray, progress. Sometimes it makes the most sense to pay
attention to the recipe, sometimes to the baking process; the recipe is
what is replicated, the taste what is chosen.
But there’s another level. Sometimes cake sales can be changed most
consequentially by altering something other than recipe or taste—
advertisements, packaging, or the perception of whether the cake is a
staple or a luxury. Sometimes sales are changed by tying the product to a
particular audience—think of products that advertise fair-trade practices,
the Nation of Islam’s Your Black Muslim Bakery, or the Christian
fundamentalist ideology of Chick-fil-A restaurants. And in those cases
recipe and taste can both be trumped by ideology in purchasing
decisions.
This is where neo–group selection fits into multilevel selection—the
idea that some heritable traits may be maladaptive for the individual but
adaptive for a group. This has cooperation and prosociality written all
over it, straight out of the analysis of Tit for Tat–ers finding one another
in a sea of Always Defect–ers. Stated more formally, it’s when A
dominates B but a group of Bs dominates a group of As.
Here’s a great example of neo–group selectionism: As a poultry
farmer, you want your groups of chickens to lay as many eggs as
possible. Take the most prolific egg layer in each group, forming them
365