accent, or names, and no one knows why they were pariahs. They may
have descended from Moorish soldiers in the Islamic invasion of Spain
and thus were discriminated against by Christians. Or they might have
been early Christians, and discrimination against them was started by
non-Christians. No one knew the sins of ancestral Cagots or how to
recognize Cagots beyond community knowledge. During the French
Revolution, Cagots burned birth certificates in government offices to
destroy proof of their status.
The automaticity is seen in another way. Consider an individual with
an impassioned hatred for an array of out-groups.35 There are two ways
to explain this. Option 1: He has carefully concluded that group A’s trade
policies hurt the economy and just happens to also believe that group B’s
ancestors were blasphemous, and thinks that group C members don’t
express sufficient contrition for a war started by their grandparents, and
perceives group D members as pushy, and thinks that group E
undermines family values. That’s a lot of cognitive just-happens-to’s.
Option 2: The guy’s authoritarian temperament is unsettled by novelty
and ambiguity about hierarchies; this isn’t a set of coherent cognitions.
As we saw in chapter 7, Theodor Adorno, in trying to understand the
roots of fascism, formalized this authoritarian temperament. Individuals
prejudiced against one type of out-group tend toward being prejudiced
against other ones, and for affective reasons.*36 More on this in the next
chapter.
The strongest evidence that abrasive Them-ing originates in emotions
and automatic processes is that supposed rational cognitions about
Thems can be unconsciously manipulated. In an example cited earlier,
subjects unconsciously primed about “loyalty” sit closer to Us-es and
farther from Thems, while those primed about “equality” do the
opposite.* In another study, subjects watched a slide show of basic,
unexciting information about a country they knew nothing about
(“There’s a country called ‘Moldova’?”). For half the subjects, faces with
positive expressions were flashed at subliminal speeds between slides;
for the other half, it was negative expressions. The former developed
more positive views of the country than the latter.37
Conscious judgments about Thems are unconsciously manipulated in
the real world. In an important experiment discussed in chapter 3,
morning commuters at train stations in predominantly white suburbs
filled out questionnaires about political views. Then, at half the stations,
404