(rather than escorting them to the bathroom), put people in solitary, set
prisoners against each other, addressed them by number, rather than by
name. The prisoners, meanwhile, had a range of responses. One cell
revolted on the second day, refusing to obey the guards and barricading
the entrance to their cell; guards subdued them with fire extinguishers.
Other prisoners resisted more individualistically; most eventually sank
into passivity and despair.
The experiment ended famously. Six days into it, as the brutality and
degradation worsened, Zimbardo was persuaded to halt the study by a
graduate student, Christina Maslach. They later married.
Situational Forces and What Lurks in All of Us
These studies are famed, have inspired movies and novels, have
entered the common culture (with predictably horrendous
misrepresentations).*65 They brought renown and notoriety to Asch,
Milgram, and Zimbardo.* And they were vastly influential in scientific
circles—according to Google Scholar, Asch’s work is cited more than
4,000 times in the literature, Milgram’s more than 27,000 times, the SPE
more than 58,000.*66 The number of times your average science paper is
cited can be counted on one hand, with most of the citations by the
scientist’s mother. The trio is a cornerstone of social psychology. In the
words of Harvard psychologist Mahzarin Banaji, “The primary simple
lesson the SPE [and, by extension, Asch and Milgram] teaches is that
situations matter” (her emphasis).
What did they show? Thanks to Asch, that average people will go
along with absurdly incorrect assertions in the name of conformity. And
thanks to the other two studies, that average people will do stunningly
bad things in the name of obedience and conformity.
The larger implications of this are enormous. Asch and Milgram (the
former a Jewish Eastern European immigrant, the latter the son of Jewish
Eastern European immigrants) worked in the era of the intellectual
challenge of making sense of Germans “just following orders.”
Milgram’s study was prompted by the start, a few months earlier, of the
war-crimes trial of Adolf Eichmann, the man who famously epitomized
the “banality of evil” because of his seeming normalcy. Zimbardo’s work
burst forth during the Vietnam War era with the likes of the My Lai
463