firm Hill + Knowlton, hired by the Kuwaiti government with the help of
Porter and cochair Representative Tom Lantos (D-California). Research
by the firm indicated that people would be particularly responsive to
stories about atrocities against babies (ya think?), so the incubator tale
was concocted, the witness coached. The story was disavowed by human
rights groups (Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch) and the
media, and the testimony was withdrawn from the Congressional Record
—long after the war.
Be careful when our enemies are made to remind us of maggots and
cancer and shit. But also beware when it is our empathic intuitions,
rather than our hateful ones, that are manipulated by those who use us for
their own goals.
Cooperation
As explored in chapter 10, understanding the evolution of
cooperation poses two challenges.
The first is the fundamental problem of how cooperation ever starts;
the dispiriting logic of the Prisoner’s Dilemma shows that whoever takes
the first cooperative step becomes one step behind.
As we saw, one plausible solution concerns founder populations—
when a subset of a population becomes isolated and its average degree of
relatedness rises, fueling cooperation through kin selection.24 Should that
founder population rejoin the general population, their cooperative
tendencies will outcompete everyone else, thus propagating cooperation.
Another solution involves green-beard effects, that poor man’s version of
kin selection, where a genetic trait generates a conspicuous marker and a
cooperative bent toward bearers of that marker. In that setting the green
beard–less will be outcompeted unless they also evolve cooperation. As
we saw, green-beard effects occur in various species.
This raises the second challenge, namely understanding why humans
are so extraordinarily cooperative with nonrelatives. We hold elevator
doors open for strangers, take turns at four-way stop signs, get off buses
in an orderly manner. We build cultures involving millions of people
sharing conventions. This requires more than founder effects and green
beards; in the years since Hamilton and Axelrod made “tit for tat” trendy,
tons of work has explored human-specific mechanisms for fostering
cooperation. There are many.
633