As I write, there’s news of the rescue of a few of the two-hundred-plus
Nigerian schoolgirls kidnapped in 2014 by the terrorist group Boko
Haram. What these girls experienced is unimaginable—terror, pain,
forced labor, endless rapes, pregnancies, AIDS. And as these few are
returned home, many are shunned—for their AIDS, for the belief that
they’ve been brainwashed into being sleeper terrorists, for the rape-born
children they carry. This does not auger well for their being anything
other than broken forever.
Chapter 11 emphasized pseudospeciation, when Thems are made to
seem so different that they hardly count as human. Chapter 15
considered the skill of demagogues at this, framing hated Thems as
insects, rodents, bacteria, malignancies, and feces. That provides a clear
punch line: be wary of rabble-rousers who frame Thems as things to step
on, spray with toxins, or flush down toilets. Simple.
But pseudospeciating propaganda can be subtler. In the fall of 1990
Iraq invaded Kuwait, and in the run-up to the Gulf War, Americans were
sickened by a story that emerged. On October 10, 1990, a fifteen-year-
old refugee from Kuwait appeared before a congressional Human Rights
Caucus.23
The girl—she would give only her first name, Nayirah—had
volunteered in a hospital in Kuwait City. She tearfully testified that Iraqi
soldiers had stolen incubators to ship home as plunder, leaving over three
hundred premature infants to die.
Our collective breath was taken away—“These people leave babies
to die on the cold floor; they are hardly human.” The testimony was seen
on the news by approximately 45 million Americans, was cited by seven
senators when justifying their support of war (a resolution that passed by
five votes), and was cited more than ten times by George H. W. Bush in
arguing for U.S. military involvement. And we went to war with a 92
percent approval rating of the president’s decision. In the words of
Representative John Porter (R-Illinois), who chaired the committee, after
Nayirah’s testimony, “we have never heard, in all this time, in all
circumstances, a record of inhumanity, and brutality, and sadism, as the
ones that [Nayirah had] given us today.”
Much later it emerged that the incubator story was a
pseudospeciating lie. The refugee was no refugee. She was Nayirah al-
Sabah, the fifteen-year-old daughter of the Kuwaiti ambassador to the
United States. The incubator story was fabricated by the public relations
632