action potential there, and then the next, and the next, all the way down
to the axon terminals.
From an informational standpoint, a neuron has two different types
of signaling systems. From the dendritic spines to the starts of the axon
hillock, it’s an analogue signal, with gradations of signals that dissipate
over space and time. And from the axon hillock to the axon terminals,
it’s a digital system with all-or-none signaling that regenerates down the
length of the axon.
Let’s throw in some imaginary numbers. Suppose an average neuron
has about one hundred dendritic spines and about one hundred axon
terminals. What are the implications of this in the context of the
analogue/digital feature of neurons?
Sometimes nothing interesting. Consider neuron A, which, as just
introduced, has one hundred axon terminals. Each one of those connects
to one of the dendritic spines of the next neuron in line, neuron B.
Neuron A has an action potential, which propagates down to all of its
one hundred axon terminals, which excites all one hundred dendritic
spines in neuron B. The threshold at the axon hillock of neuron B
requires fifty of the dendrites to get excited around the same time in
order to generate an action potential; thus, with all one hundred of the
dendrites firing, neuron B is guaranteed to get an action potential.
Now, instead, neuron A projects half of its axon terminals to neuron
B and half to neuron C. It has an action potential; does that guarantee
one in neurons B and C? Yes. Each of those neurons’ axon hillocks has
that threshold of needing a signal from fifty dendritic pebbles at once in
order to have an action potential.
Now, instead, neuron A evenly distributes its axon terminals among
ten different target neurons, neurons B through K. Is its action potential
going to produce action potentials in the target neurons? No way—
continuing our example, the ten dendritic spines’ worth of pebbles in
each target neuron is way below the threshold of fifty pebbles.
So what will ever cause an action potential in, say, neuron K, which
has only ten of its dendritic spines getting excitatory signals from neuron
A? Well, what’s going on with its other ninety dendritic spines? They’re
getting inputs from other neurons—nine of them, with ten inputs from
each. When will neuron B have an action potential? When at least half of
the neurons projecting to it have action potentials. In other words, any
given neuron integrates the inputs from all the neurons projecting to it.
685