that when the light comes on it’s reward time, and it’s hippocampal
amygdaloid and frontal cortical neurons projecting to dopamine neurons
that become more excitable.
This explains context-dependent craving in addiction.93 Suppose an
alcoholic has been clean and sober for years. Return him to where the
alcohol consumption used to occur (e.g., that rundown street corner, that
fancy men’s club), and those potentiated synapses, those cues that were
learned to be associated with alcohol, come roaring back into action,
dopamine surges with anticipation, and the craving inundates.
Can a reliable cue of an impending reward eventually become
rewarding itself? This has been shown by Huda Akil of the University of
Michigan. A light in the left side of a rat’s cage signals that lever
pressing will produce a reward from a food chute on the right side.
Remarkably, rats eventually will work for the chance to hang around on
the left side of the cage, just because it feels so nice to be there. The
signal has gained the dopaminergic power of what is being signaled.
Similarly, rats will work to be exposed to a cue that signals that some
kind of reward is likely, without knowing what or when. This is what
fetishes are, in both the anthropological and sexual sense.94
Schultz’s group has shown that the magnitude of an anticipatory
dopamine rise reflects two variables. First is the size of the anticipated
reward. A monkey has learned that a light means that ten lever presses
earns one unit of reward, while a tone means ten presses earns ten units.
And soon a tone provokes more anticipatory dopamine than does a light.
It’s “This is going to be great” versus “This is going to be great.”
The second variable is extraordinary. The rule is that the light comes
on, you press the lever, you get the reward. Now things change. Light
comes on, press the lever, get the reward . . . only 50 percent of the time.
Remarkably, once that new scenario is learned, far more dopamine is
released. Why? Because nothing fuels dopamine release like the
“maybe” of intermittent reinforcement.95
This additional dopamine is released at a distinctive time. The light
comes on in the 50 percent scenario, producing the usual anticipatory
dopamine rise before the lever pressing starts. Back in the predictable
days when lever pressing always earned a reward, once the pressing was
finished, dopamine levels remained low until the reward arrived,
followed by a little dopamine blip. But in this 50 percent scenario, once
73