The equilibrium or balance, so to speak, between his intellectual
faculties and animal propensities, seems to have been destroyed.
He is fitful, irreverent, indulging at times in the grossest profanity
(which was not previously his custom), manifesting but little
deference for his fellows, impatient of restraint or advice when it
conflicts with his desires, at times pertinaciously obstinate, yet
capricious and vacillating, devising many plans of future
operations, which are no sooner arranged than they are abandoned
in turn for others appearing more feasible.
Gage was described by friends as “no longer Gage,” was incapable of
resuming his job and was reduced to appearing (with his rod) as an
exhibit displayed by P. T. Barnum. Poignant as hell.
—
Amazingly, Gage got better. Within a few years of his injury, he could
resume work (mostly as a stagecoach driver) and was described as being
broadly appropriate in his behavior. His remaining right frontal cortical
tissue had taken on some of the functions lost in the injury. Such
malleability of the brain is the focus of chapter 5.
—
Another example of what happens when the frontal cortex is damaged is
observed in frontotemporal dementia (FTD), which starts by damaging
the frontal cortex; intriguingly, the first neurons killed are those
mysterious von Economo neurons that are unique to primates, elephants,
and cetaceans.53 What are people with FTD like? They exhibit
behavioral disinhibition and socially inappropriate behaviors. There’s
also an apathy and lack of initiating behavior that reflects the fact that
the “decider” is being destroyed.*
Something similar is seen in Huntington’s disease, a horrific disorder
due to a thoroughly weird mutation. Subcortical circuits that coordinate
signaling to muscles are destroyed, and the sufferer is progressively
incapacitated by involuntary writhing movements. Except that it turns
out that there is frontal damage as well, often before the subcortical
damage. In about half the patients there’s also behavioral disinhibition—
stealing, aggressiveness, hypersexuality, bursts of compulsive,
inexplicable gambling.* Social and behavioral disinhibition also occur in
56