rewards doing so. Punishment is effortful and costly, ranging from
forgoing a reward when rejecting a lowball offer in the Ultimatum Game
to our tax dollars paying for the dental plan of the prison guard who
operates the lethal injection machine. That rush of self-righteous pleasure
is what drives us to shoulder the costs. This was shown in one
neuroimaging study of economic game play. Subjects alternated between
being able to punish lousy offers at no cost and having to spend points
they had earned to do so. And the more dopaminergic activation during
no-cost punishment, the more someone would pay to punish in the other
condition.33
Thus the nearly impossible task is to overcome that. Sure, as I said,
punishment would still be used in an instrumental fashion, to acutely
shape behavior. But there is simply no place for the idea that punishment
is a virtue. Our dopaminergic pathways will have to find their
stimulation elsewhere. I sure don’t know how best to achieve that mind-
set. But crucially, I sure do know we can do it—because we have before:
Once people with epilepsy were virtuously punished for their intimacy
with Lucifer. Now we mandate that if their seizures aren’t under control,
they can’t drive. And the key point is that no one views such a driving
ban as virtuous, pleasurable punishment, believing that a person with
treatment-resistant seizures “deserves” to be banned from driving.
Crowds of goitrous yahoos don’t excitedly mass to watch the epileptic’s
driver’s license be publicly burned. We’ve successfully banished the
notion of punishment in that realm. It may take centuries, but we can do
the same in all our current arenas of punishment.
Which brings us to the huge practical challenge. The traditional
rationales behind imprisonment are to protect the public, to rehabilitate,
to punish, and finally to use the threat of punishment to deter others.
That last one is the practical challenge, because such threats of
punishment can indeed deter. How can that be done? The broadest type
of solution is incompatible with an open society—making the public
believe that imprisonment involves horrific punishments when, in reality,
it doesn’t. Perhaps the loss of freedom that occurs when a dangerous
person is removed from society must be deterrence enough. Perhaps
some conventional punishment will still be needed if it is sufficiently
deterring. But what must be abolished are the views that punishment can
be deserved and that punishing can be virtuous.
612