getting clammy at the possibility of outcome B.” Experimentally
boosting the strength of that sympathetic signal strengthens the aversion.
This is a picture of normal collaboration between the limbic system
and frontal cortex.72 Naturally, things are not always balanced. Anger,
for example, makes people less analytical and more reflexive in
decisions about punishment. Stressed people often make hideously bad
decisions, marinated in emotion; chapter 4 examines what stress does to
the amygdala and frontal cortex.*
The effects of stress on the frontal cortex are dissected by the late
Harvard psychologist Daniel Wegner in an aptly titled paper, “How to
Think, Say or Do Precisely the Worst Thing on Any Occasion.”73 He
considers what Edgar Allan Poe called the “imp of the perverse”:
We see a rut coming up in the road ahead and proceed to steer our
bike right into it. We make a mental note not to mention a sore
point in conversation and then cringe in horror as we blurt out
exactly that thing. We carefully cradle the glass of red wine as we
cross the room, all the while thinking “don’t spill,” and then
juggle it onto the carpet under the gaze of our host.
Wegner demonstrated a two-step process of frontocortical regulation:
(A) one stream identifies X as being very important; (B) the other stream
tracks whether the conclusion is “Do X” or “Never do X.” And during
stress, distraction, or heavy cognitive load, the two streams can
dissociate; the A stream exerts its presence without the B stream saying
which fork in the road to take. The chance that you will do precisely the
wrong thing rises not despite your best efforts but because of a stress-
boggled version of them.
—
This concludes our overview of the frontal cortex; the mantra is that it
makes you do the harder thing when that is the right thing. Five final
points:
“Doing the harder thing” effectively is not an argument
for valuing either emotion or cognition more than the
other. For example, as discussed in chapter 11, we are
64