During sustained stress, the amygdala processes emotional sensory
information more rapidly and less accurately, dominates hippocampal
function, and disrupts frontocortical function; we’re more fearful, our
thinking is muddled, and we assess risks poorly and act impulsively out
of habit, rather than incorporating new data.77 This is a prescription for
rapid, reactive aggression; stress and acute administration of
glucocorticoids increase such aggression in both rodents and humans.
We have two familiar qualifications: (a) rather than creating aggression,
stress and glucocorticoids increase sensitivity to social triggers of
aggression; (b) this occurs most readily in individuals already
predisposed toward aggression. As we will see in the next chapter, stress
over the course of weeks to months produces a less nuanced picture.
There’s an additional depressing reason why stress fosters aggression
—because it reduces stress. Shock a rat and its glucocorticoid levels and
blood pressure rise; with enough shocks, it’s at risk for a “stress” ulcer.
Various things can buffer the rat during shocks—running on a running
wheel, eating, gnawing on wood in frustration. But a particularly
effective buffer is for the rat to bite another rat. Stress-induced (aka
frustration-induced) displacement aggression is ubiquitous in various
species. Among baboons, for example, nearly half of aggression is this
type—a high-ranking male loses a fight and chases a subadult male, who
promptly bites a female, who then lunges at an infant. My research
shows that within the same dominance rank, the more a baboon tends to
displace aggression after losing a fight, the lower his glucocorticoid
levels.78
Humans excel at stress-induced displacement aggression—consider
how economic downturns increase rates of spousal and child abuse. Or
consider a study of family violence and pro football. If the local team
unexpectedly loses, spousal/partner violence by men increases 10
percent soon afterward (with no increase when the team won or was
expected to lose). And as the stakes get higher, the pattern is
exacerbated: a 13 percent increase after upsets when the team was in
playoff contention, a 20 percent increase when the upset is by a rival.79
Little is known concerning the neurobiology of displacement
aggression blunting the stress response. I’d guess that lashing out
activates dopaminergic reward pathways, a surefire way to inhibit CRH
release.*80 Far too often, giving an ulcer helps avoid getting one.
128