INTELLIGENCE
Oh, what the hell? Let’s begin with something inflammatory. Starting
with Theodor Adorno in the 1950s, people have suggested that lower
intelligence predicts adherence to conservative ideology.33 Some but not
all studies since then have supported this conclusion. More consistent
has been a link between lower intelligence and a subtype of
conservatism, namely right-wing authoritarianism (RWA, a fondness for
hierarchy). One particularly thorough demonstration of this involved
more than fifteen thousand subjects in the UK and United States;
importantly, the links among low IQ, RWA, and intergroup prejudice
were there after controlling for education and socioeconomic status. The
standard, convincing explanation for the link is that RWA provides
simple answers, ideal for people with poor abstract reasoning skills.
INTELLECTUAL STYLE
This literature has two broad themes. One is that rightists are
relatively uncomfortable intellectually with ambiguity; this is covered
below. The other is that leftists, well, think harder, have a greater
capacity for what the political scientist Philip Tetlock of the University
of Pennsylvania calls “integrative complexity.”
In one study conservatives and liberals, when asked about the causes
of poverty, both tended toward personal attributions (“They’re poor
because they’re lazy”). But only if they had to make snap judgments.
Give people more time, and liberals shifted toward situational
explanations (“Wait, things are stacked against the poor”). In other
words, conservatives start gut and stay gut; liberals go from gut to
head.34
This differing attributional style extends way beyond politics. Tell
liberals or conservatives about a guy who trips over someone’s feet while
learning a dance, ask for a snap assessment, and everyone does personal
attribution—the guy’s clumsy. It’s only with time that the liberals go
situational—maybe the dance is really difficult.
Obviously this dichotomy isn’t perfect. Rightists did personal
attribution for Lewinsky-gate (Bill Clinton’s rotten) while leftists did
situational (it’s a vast right-wing conspiracy), and things ran the opposite
with Nixon and Watergate. However, they are pretty reliable.
Why the difference? Liberals and conservatives are equally capable
of thinking past gut personal attributions to subtler situational ones—
448