ACC; doing the same for a stranger activates the TPJ, that region central
to Theory of Mind.22
This extends to broader versions of Us versus Them. As introduced
in chapter 3, we have a stronger sensorimotor response in our hands
when the hand we see being poked with a needle is of our race; the
stronger one’s implicit in-group bias, the stronger this effect. Meanwhile,
other studies show that the stronger the discrepancy in patterns of neural
activation when observing an in-group versus an out-group person in
pain, the lower the chances of helping the latter.23 Thus it’s no surprise
that feeling the same degree of empathy or achieving the same level of
perspective taking for a Them as for an Us requires greater frontocortical
activation. This is the domain where you must suppress the automatic
and implicit urges to be indifferent, if not repulsed, and do the creative,
motivated work of finding the affective commonalities.*24
Categorical boundaries to the extension of empathy also run along
socioeconomic lines, but in an asymmetrical manner. What does that
mean? That when it comes to empathy and compassion, rich people tend
to suck. This has been explored at length in a series of studies by Dacher
Keltner of UC Berkeley. Across the socioeconomic spectrum, on the
average, the wealthier people are, the less empathy they report for people
in distress and the less compassionately they act. Moreover, wealthier
people are less adept at recognizing other people’s emotions and in
experimental settings are greedier and more likely to cheat or steal. Two
of the findings were picked up by the media as irresistible: (a) wealthier
people (as assessed by the cost of the car they were driving) are less
likely than poor people to stop for pedestrians at crosswalks; (b) suppose
there’s a bowl of candy in the lab; invite test subjects, after they finish
doing some task, to grab some candy on the way out, telling them that
whatever’s left over will be given to some kids—the wealthier take more
candy.25
So do miserable, greedy, unempathic people become wealthy, or does
being wealthy increase the odds of a person’s becoming that way? As a
cool manipulation, Keltner primed subjects to focus either on their
socioeconomic success (by asking them to compare themselves with
people less well off than them) or on the opposite. Make people feel
wealthy, and they take more candy from children.
What explains this pattern? A number of interrelated factors, built
around the system justification described in chapter 12—wealthier
533