HOW THEY WILL VIEW US
I
f you still think there is mitigated free will, there are three possible
routes to take at this juncture.
To appreciate the first, let’s briefly consider epilepsy. Scientists
understand a lot about the neurological bases of seizures and how they
involve firing with abnormally high frequency and synchrony. But not
that long ago, say, a century ago, epilepsy was viewed as a type of
mental illness. And before that it was thought by many to be a
communicable infectious disease. And at other times and places, it was
thought to be caused by menstruation, or excessive sex, or excessive
masturbation. But in 1487 two German scholars uncovered a cause of
epilepsy that really seemed to hit the nail on the head.
The two Dominican friars, Heinrich Kramer and Jakob Sprenger,
published Malleus Maleficarum (Latin for “Hammer of the Witches”),
the definitive treatise about why someone becomes a witch, how to
identify them, and what to do with them. What was one of the surest
ways to identify a witch? If they are seized by Satan, if they convulse
from the malign power of the devil within them.
Their guideline was the Gospel according to Mark, 9:14–29. A man
brings his son to Jesus, saying there is something wrong with him and
asking Jesus to cure him—a spirit comes and seizes him, making him
mute, and then that spirit throws him to the ground, where he foams at
the mouth and grinds his teeth and becomes rigid. The man presents his
son, who is promptly seized by that spirit and falls to the ground,
convulsing and foaming. Jesus perceives that the boy is infested with an
unclean spirit and commands that vile spirit to come out and be gone.
The seizing ceases.
Thus seizures were a sign of demonic possession, a certain marker of
a witch. Malleus Maleficarum arrived in time to take advantage of mass
production through the recently invented printing press. In the words of
historian Jeffrey Russell, “The swift propagation of the witch hysteria by
the press was the first evidence that Gutenberg had not liberated man
from original sin.” The book was widely read and went through more
than thirty editions over the subsequent century. Estimates are that from
608