of three vocalizations: (a) sounds of the two females’ relatives fighting
with each other; (b) a relative of one fighting with a third party; (c) two
other random females fighting.17 If a female’s relative was involved in
the fighting, she’d look toward the speaker longer than if there were no
relatives involved. And if it was relatives of the two females fighting
each other, the higher-ranking one would remind the subordinate of her
place by supplanting her from her spot.
Another playback study created some baboon virtual reality.18
Baboon A dominates baboon B. Thanks to cutting and splicing of
recordings of vocalizations, baboon A is heard making a dominance
vocalization, B making a subordination one. When this happens, no
baboons looked at the bushes—A > B, boring status quo. But if baboon
A is heard making a subordination vocalization after B makes a
dominance one—a rank reversal—everyone orients to the bushes (“Did
you hear what I just heard?”). Then a third scenario—a dominance
reversal between two members of the same family. And no one looks,
because it’s uninteresting. (“Families, they’re crazy. You should see mine
—we have these huge dominance reversals and are hugging an hour
later.”) Baboons “classify others simultaneously according to both
individual rank and kinship.”
Thus other primates contemplate kinship with remarkable
sophistication, with kinship determining patterns of cooperation and
competition.
Nonprimates are also into kin selection. Consider this—sperm in a
female’s vaginal tract can aggregate, allowing them to swim faster.
Among a deer mouse species where females mate with multiple males,
sperm aggregate only with sperm from the same individual or a close
relative.19
As behavioral examples, squirrels and prairie dogs give alarm
vocalizations when spotting a predator. It’s risky, calling attention to the
caller, and such altruism is more common when in the proximity of
relatives. Social groups built around female relatives occur in numerous
species (e.g., lion prides, where related females nurse one another’s
cubs). Moreover, while prides typically contain a single breeding male,
on those occasions when it’s two males, better than chance that they’re
brothers. There is a striking similarity in humans. Most cultures have
historically allowed polygyny, with monogamy as the rarer beast. Even
rarer is polyandry—multiple men married to one woman. This occurs in
342