new information into preexisting schemas, something called “pattern
separation.” This is when you learn that two things you previously
thought were the same are, in fact, different—dolphins and porpoises,
baking soda and baking powder, Zooey Deschanel and Katy Perry.
Adult neurogenesis is the trendiest topic in neuroscience. In the five
years after Altman’s 1965 paper was published, it was cited (a
respectable) twenty-nine times in the literature; in the last five, more than
a thousand. Current work examines how exercise stimulates the process
(probably by increasing levels of certain growth factors in the brain),
how new neurons know where to migrate, whether depression is caused
by a failure of hippocampal neurogenesis, and whether the neurogenesis
stimulated by antidepressants is required for such medications to work.24
Why did it take so long for adult neurogenesis to be accepted? I’ve
interacted with many of the principals and am struck by their differing
takes. At one extreme is the view that while skeptics like Rakic were
ham-handed, they provided quality control and that, counter to how path-
of-the-hero epics go, some early work in the field was not all that solid.
At the other extreme is the view that Rakic et al., having failed to find
adult neurogenesis, couldn’t accept that it existed. This psychohistorical
view, of the old guard clinging to dogma in the face of changing winds,
is weakened a bit by Altman’s not having been a young anarchist running
amok in the archives; in fact, he is a bit older than Rakic and other
principal skeptics. All of this needs to be adjudicated by historians,
screenwriters, and soon, I hope, by the folks in Stockholm.
Altman, who at the time of this writing is eighty-nine, published a
2011 memoir chapter.25 Parts of it have a plaintive, confused tone—
everyone was so excited at first; what happened? Maybe he spent too
much time in the lab and too little marketing the discovery, he suggests.
There’s the ambivalence of someone who spent a long time as a scorned
prophet who at least got to be completely vindicated. He’s philosophical
about it—hey, I’m a Hungarian Jew who escaped from a Nazi camp; you
take things in stride after that.
146