there are some rare domains where extremes of biological dysfunction
cause involuntary changes in behavior, and we’re not great at predicting
who undergoes such changes. In other words, the homunculus is alive
and well.
But if you believe that there will be the accrual of any more
knowledge, you’ve just committed to either the view that any evidence
for free will ultimately will be eliminated or the view that, at the very
least, the homunculus will be jammed into ever tinier places. And with
either of those views, you’ve also agreed that something else is virtually
guaranteed: that people in the future will look back at us as we do at
purveyors of leeches and bloodletting and trepanation, as we look back at
the fifteenth-century experts who spent their days condemning witches,
that those people in the future will consider us and think, “My God, the
things they didn’t know then. The harm that they did.”
Archaeologists do something impressive, reflecting disciplinary
humility. When archaeologists excavate a site, they recognize that future
archaeologists will be horrified at their primitive techniques, at the
destructiveness of their excavating. Thus they often leave most of a site
untouched to await their more skillful disciplinary descendants. For
example, astonishingly, more than forty years after excavations began,
less than 1 percent of the famed Qin dynasty terra-cotta army in China
has been uncovered.
Those adjudicating trials don’t have the luxury of adjourning for a
century until we really understand the biology of behavior. But at the
very least the system needs the humility of archaeology, a sense that,
above all else, we shouldn’t act irrevocably.
But what do we actually do in the meantime? Simple (which is easy
for me to say, looking at the legal world from the soothing distance of
my laboratory): probably just three things. One is easy, one is very
challenging to implement, and the third is nearly impossible.
First the easy one. If you reject free will and the discussion turns to
the legal system, the crazy-making, inane challenge that always surfaces
is that you’d do nothing about criminals, that they’d be free to walk the
streets, wreaking havoc. Let’s trash this one instantly—no rational
person who rejects free will actually believes this, would argue that we
should do nothing because, after all, the person has frontal damage, or
because, after all, evolution has selected for the damaging trait to
traditionally be adaptive, or because, after all . . . People must be
610