the opposite sex, perhaps there’s less desire to seem like a rugged
individualist than fear of seeming foolish.81
Finally, of course, we are the products of our culture. In broad cross-
cultural surveys, Milgram and others showed more compliance in
subjects from collectivist than from individualist cultures.82
STRESS
Exactly as with Us/Them-ing, people are more likely to conform and
obey at times of stress, ranging from time pressure to a real or imagined
outside threat to a novel context. In stressful settings rules gain power.
ALTERNATIVES
Finally, there is the key issue of whether you perceive alternatives to
the actions demanded of you. It can be a solitary task to reframe and
reappraise a situation, to make the implicit explicit, to engage in
perspective taking, to question. To imagine that resistance is not futile.
A huge help in doing that is evidence that you are not alone. From
Asch and Milgram on, it’s clear that the presence of anyone else pushing
back against the pressure can be galvanizing. Ten against two in a jury
room is a world of difference from eleven against one. One lone voice
crying out in the wilderness is a crank. Two voices joined together form
a nidus of resistance, offer the start of an oppositional social identity.
It certainly helps to know that you are not alone, that there are others
who are willing to resist, that there are those who have done so in the
past. But often something still holds us back. Eichmann’s seeming
normalcy supplied us, thanks to Hannah Arendt, with the notion of the
banality of evil. Zimbardo, in his recent writing, emphasizes the
“banality of heroism.” As discussed in various chapters, people who
heroically refuse to look the other way, who do the right thing even when
it carries the ultimate cost—tend to be surprisingly normal. The stars
didn’t align at their births; doves of peace did not envelop them where
they strode. They put their pants on one leg at a time. This should be a
huge source of strength for us.
473