Thus transcription factors regulate genes. What regulates
transcription factors? The answer devastates the concept of genetic
determinism: the environment.
To start unexcitingly, “environment” can mean intracellular
environment. Suppose a hardworking neuron is low on energy. This state
activates a particular transcription factor, which binds to a specific
promoter, which activates the next gene in line (the “downstream” gene).
This gene codes for a glucose transporter; more glucose transporter
proteins are made and inserted into the cell membrane, improving the
neuron’s ability to access circulating glucose.
Next consider “environment,” including the neuron next door, which
releases serotonin onto the neuron in question. Suppose less serotonin
has been released lately. Sentinel transcription factors in dendritic spines
sense this, travel to the DNA, and bind to the promoter upstream of the
serotonin receptor gene. More receptor is made and placed in the
dendritic spines, and they become more sensitive to the faint serotonin
signal.
Sometimes “environment” can be far-flung within an organism. A
male secretes testosterone, which travels through the bloodstream and
binds to androgen receptors in muscle cells. This activates a
transcription-factor cascade that results in more intracellular scaffolding
proteins, enlarging the cell (i.e., muscle mass increases).
Finally, and most important, there is “environment,” meaning the
outside world. A female smells her newborn, meaning that odorant
molecules that floated off the baby bind to receptors in her nose. The
receptors activate and (many steps later in the hypothalamus) a
transcription factor activates, leading to the production of more oxytocin.
Once secreted, the oxytocin causes milk letdown. Genes are not the
deterministic holy grail if they can be regulated by the smell of a baby’s
tushy. Genes are regulated by all the incarnations of environment.
In other words, genes don’t make sense outside the context of
environment. Promoters and transcription factor introduce if/then
clauses: “If you smell your baby, then activate the oxytocin gene.”
Now the plot thickens.
There are multiple types of transcription factors in a cell, each
binding to a particular DNA sequence constituting a particular promoter.
Consider a genome containing one gene. In that imaginary organism
there is only a single profile of transcription (i.e., the gene is
228