McGuinness offered, and Robinson accepted, a commiserative
handshake. A guy-code sacred-value moment.*31
Something similar happened in South Africa, much of it promulgated
by Nelson Mandela, a genius at appreciating sacred values.32 Mandela,
while at Robben Island, had taught himself the Afrikaans language and
studied Afrikaans culture—not just to literally understand what his
captors were saying among themselves at the prison but to understand
the people and their mind-set. At one point just before the birth of a free
South Africa, Mandela entered into secret negotiations with the
Afrikaans leader General Constand Viljoen. The latter, chief of the
apartheid-era South African Defence Force and founder of the Afrikaner
Volksfront group opposed to the dismantling of apartheid, commanded
an Afrikaans militia of fifty to sixty thousand men. He was therefore in a
position to doom South Africa’s impending first free election and
probably trigger a civil war that would kill thousands.
They met in Mandela’s house, with the general apparently
anticipating tense negotiations across a conference table. Instead the
smiling, cordial Mandela led him to the warm, homey living room, sat
beside him on a comfy couch designed to soften the hardest of asses, and
spoke to the man in Afrikaans, including small talk about sports, leaping
up now and then to get the two of them tea and snacks. While the general
did not quite wind up as Mandela’s soul mate, and it is impossible to
assess the importance of any single thing that Mandela said or did,
Viljoen was stunned by Mandela’s use of Afrikaans and warm, chatty
familiarity with Afrikaans culture. An act of true respect for sacred
values. “Mandela wins over all who meet him,” he later said. And over
the course of the conversation, Mandela persuaded Viljoen to call off the
armed insurrection and to instead run in the upcoming election as an
opposition leader. When Mandela retired from his presidency in 1999,
Viljoen gave a short, halting speech in Parliament praising Mandela . . .
in the latter’s native language, Xhosa.*
The successful birth of the new South Africa was rife with acts of
respect for sacred values. Perhaps the most famous was Mandela’s public
embrace of rugby, a sport highly symbolic of Afrikaans culture and
historically disdained by black South Africans. And famously, as
depicted in book and film, among the consequences was the tectonically
symbolic act of the heavily Afrikaans national rugby team singing the
ANC anthem, the hymn “Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika,” followed by a black
579