THE APPROACH IN THIS BOOK
I
make my living as a combination neurobiologist—someone who
studies the brain—and primatologist—someone who studies monkeys
and apes. Therefore, this is a book that is rooted in science, specifically
biology. And out of that come three key points. First, you can’t begin to
understand things like aggression, competition, cooperation, and
empathy without biology; I say this for the benefit of a certain breed of
social scientist who finds biology to be irrelevant and a bit ideologically
suspect when thinking about human social behavior. But just as
important, second, you’re just as much up the creek if you rely only on
biology; this is said for the benefit of a style of molecular fundamentalist
who believes that the social sciences are destined to be consumed by
“real” science. And as a third point, by the time you finish this book,
you’ll see that it actually makes no sense to distinguish between aspects
of a behavior that are “biological” and those that would be described as,
say, “psychological” or “cultural.” Utterly intertwined.
Understanding the biology of these human behaviors is obviously
important. But unfortunately it is hellishly complicated.2 Now, if you
were interested in the biology of, say, how migrating birds navigate, or in
the mating reflex that occurs in female hamsters when they’re ovulating,
this would be an easier task. But that’s not what we’re interested in.
Instead, it’s human behavior, human social behavior, and in many cases
abnormal human social behavior. And it is indeed a mess, a subject
involving brain chemistry, hormones, sensory cues, prenatal
environment, early experience, genes, both biological and cultural
evolution, and ecological pressures, among other things.
How are we supposed to make sense of all these factors in thinking
about behavior? We tend to use a certain cognitive strategy when dealing
with complex, multifaceted phenomena, in that we break down those
separate facets into categories, into buckets of explanation. Suppose
there’s a rooster standing next to you, and there’s a chicken across the
street. The rooster gives a sexually solicitive gesture that is hot by
chicken standards, and she promptly runs over to mate with him (I
haven’t a clue if this is how it works, but let’s just suppose). And thus we
11