KIN SELECTION
T
o understand the next foundational concept, reflect on what it
means to be related to someone and to pass on copies of “your”
genes.
Suppose you have an identical twin, with the same genome as you.
As a startling, irrefutable fact, in terms of the genes being passed on to
the next generation, it doesn’t matter if you reproduce or sacrifice
yourself so that your twin reproduces.
What about a full sibling who isn’t an identical twin? Recall from
chapter 8 that you’d share 50 percent of your genes with him.* Thus
reproducing once and dying so that he reproduces twice are
evolutionarily identical. Half sibling, 25 percent of genes in common,
calculate accordingly. . . .
The geneticist J. B. S. Haldane, who, when asked if he’d sacrifice his
life for a brother, is credited to have quipped, “I’ll gladly lay down my
life for two brothers or eight cousins.” You can leave copies of your
genes in the next generation by reproducing, but also by helping relatives
reproduce, especially closer relatives. Hamilton formalized this with an
equation factoring in the costs and benefits of helping someone,
weighted by their degree of relatedness to you. This is the essence of kin
selection.* This explains the crucial fact that in countless species, whom
you cooperate with, compete with, or mate with depends on their degree
of relatedness to you.
Mammals first encounter kin selection soon after birth, reflecting
something monumentally obvious: females rarely nurse someone else’s
infants. Next, among numerous primates the mother of a newborn and an
adolescent female may commence a relationship fraught with pluses and
minuses—the mother occasionally lets the adolescent care for her
offspring. For the mother the plus is getting time to forage without baby
on board; the minus is that the babysitter may be incompetent. For the
adolescent the plus is getting mothering experience; the minus, the effort
of child care. Lynn Fairbanks of UCLA has quantified the pluses and
minuses of such “allomothering” (including that adolescents who
340