offspring—but the occurrence of either act violates strict kin selection.)
And in the primogeniture system of land inheritance, birth order trumps
degree of relatedness.
Thus we have textbook examples of kin selection, but also dramatic
exceptions.
Why do humans have such marked deviations from kin selection? I
think this often reflects how humans go about recognizing relatives. We
don’t do it with certainty, by innate recognition of MHC-derived
pheromones, the way rodents do (despite our being able to distinguish
degrees of relatedness to some extent by smell). Nor do we do it by
imprinting on sensory cues, deciding, “This person is my mother because
I remember that her voice was the loudest when I was a fetus.”
Instead we do kin recognition cognitively, by thinking about it. But
crucially, not always rationally—as a general rule, we treat people like
relatives when they feel like relatives.
One fascinating example is the Westermarck effect, demonstrated by
marriage patterns among people raised in the Israeli kibbutz system.62
Communal child rearing is central to the ethos of the traditional socialist
agricultural kibbutz approach. Children know who their parents are and
interact with them a few hours a day. But otherwise they live, learn, play,
eat, and sleep with the cohort of kids their age in communal quarters
staffed by nurses and teachers.
In the 1970s anthropologist Joseph Shepher examined records of all
the marriages that had ever occurred between people from the same
kibbutz. And out of the nearly three thousand occurrences, there was no
instance of two individuals marrying who had been in the same age
group during their first six years of life. Oh, people from the same peer
group typically had loving, close, lifelong relationships. But no sexual
attraction. “I love him/her to pieces, but am I attracted? Yech—he/she
feels like my sibling.” Who feels like a relative (and thus not like a
potential mate)? Someone with whom you took a lot of baths when you
both were kids.
How’s this for irrationality? Back to people deciding whether to save
the person or the dog. The decision depended not only on who the person
was (sibling, cousin, stranger) but also on who the dog was—a strange
dog or your own. Remarkably, 46 percent of women would save their
dog over a foreign tourist. What would any rational baboon, pika, or lion
conclude? That those women believe they are more related to a
373