NONLINEAR EXCITATION
W
e start small. How can events from months ago produce a
synapse with altered excitability today? How do synapses
“remember”?
When neuroscientists first approached the mystery of memory at the
start of the twentieth century, they asked that question on a more macro
level—how does a brain remember? Obviously, a memory was stored in
a single neuron, and a new memory required a new neuron.
The discovery that adult brains don’t make new neurons trashed that
idea. Better microscopes revealed neuronal arborization, the breathtaking
complexity of branches of dendrites and axon terminals. Maybe a new
memory requires a neuron to grow a new axonal or dendritic branch.
Knowledge emerged about synapses, neurotransmitter-ology was
born, and this idea was modified—a new memory requires the formation
of a new synapse, a new connection between an axon terminal and a
dendritic spine.
These speculations were tossed on the ash heap of history in 1949,
because of the work of the Canadian neurobiologist Donald Hebb, a man
so visionary that even now, nearly seventy years later, neuroscientists
still own bobblehead dolls of him. In his seminal book, The Organization
of Behaviour, Hebb proposed what became the dominant paradigm.
Forming memories doesn’t require new synapses (let alone new branches
or neurons); it requires the strengthening of preexisting synapses.1
What does “strengthening” mean? In circuitry terms, if neuron A
synapses onto neuron B, it means that an action potential in neuron A
more readily triggers one in neuron B. They are more tightly coupled;
they “remember.” Translated into cellular terms, “strengthening” means
that the wave of excitation in a dendritic spine spreads farther, getting
closer to the distant axon hillock.
Extensive research shows that experience that causes repeated firing
across a synapse “strengthens” it, with a key role played by the
neurotransmitter glutamate.
Recall from chapter 2 how an excitatory neurotransmitter binds to its
receptor in the postsynaptic dendritic spine, causing a sodium channel to
135