SOMEWHAT BETTER ANGELS
W
hen it comes to our best and worst behaviors, the world is
astonishingly different from that of the not-so-distant past. At the
dawn of the nineteenth century, slavery occurred worldwide, including in
the colonies of a Europe basking in the Enlightenment. Child labor was
universal and would soon reach its exploitative golden age with the
Industrial Revolution. And there wasn’t a country that punished
mistreatment of animals. Now every nation has outlawed slavery, and
most attempt to enforce that; most have child labor laws, rates of child
labor have declined, and it increasingly consists of children working
alongside their parents in their homes; most countries regulate the
treatment of animals in some manner.
The world is also safer. Fifteenth-century Europe averaged 41
homicides per 100,000 people per year. Currently only El Salvador,
Venezuela, and Honduras, at 62, 64, and 85, respectively, are worse; the
world averages 6.9, Europe averages 1.4, and there are Iceland, Japan,
and Singapore at 0.3.
Here are things that are rarer in recent centuries: Forced marriages,
child brides, genital mutilation, wife beating, polygamy, widow burning.
Persecution of homosexuals, epileptics, albinos. Beating of
schoolchildren, beating of beasts of burden. Rule of a land by an
occupying army, by a colonial overlord, by an unelected dictator.
Illiteracy, death in infancy, death in childbirth, death from preventable
disease. Capital punishment.
Here are things invented in the last century: Bans on the use of
certain types of weapons. The World Court and the concept of crimes
against humanity. The UN and the dispatching of multinational
peacekeeping forces. International agreements to hinder trafficking of
blood diamonds, elephant tusks, rhino horns, leopard skins, and humans.
Agencies that collect money to aid disaster victims anywhere on the
planet, that facilitate intercontinental adoption of orphans, that battle
global pandemics and send medical personnel to any place of conflict.
Yes, I know, I’m an utter naïf if I think laws are universally enforced.
For example, in 1981 Mauritania became the last country to ban slavery;
616