adult rodent decreases impulsive aggression, doing the same in fetal
rodents produces adults with increased impulsive aggression.
Yikes, this is complicated. Why go through the agony of all these
explanatory twists and turns? Because this obscure corner of
neurogenetics has caught the public’s fancy, with—I kid you not—the
low-activity MAO-A variant being referred to as the “warrior gene” by
both scientists and in the media.*43 And that warrior hoo-hah is
worsened by the MAO-A gene being X linked and its variants being
more consequential in males than females. Amazingly, prison sentences
for murderers have now been lessened in at least two cases because it
was argued that the criminal, having the “warrior gene” variant of MAO-
A, was inevitably fated to be uncontrollably violent. OMG.
Responsible people in the field have recoiled in horror at this sort of
unfounded genetic determinism seeping into the courtroom. The effects
of MAO-A variants are tiny. There is nonspecificity in the sense that
MAO-A degrades not only serotonin but norepinephrine as well. Most of
all, there is nonspecificity in the behavioral effects of the variants. For
example, while nearly everyone seems to remember that the landmark
MAO-A paper that started all the excitement was about aggression (one
authoritative review referred to the Dutch family with the mutation as
“notorious for the persistent and extreme reactive aggression
demonstrated by some of its males”), in actuality members of the family
with the mutation had borderline mental retardation. Moreover, while
some individuals with the mutation were quite violent, the antisocial
behavior of others consisted of arson and exhibitionism. So maybe the
gene has something to do with the extreme reactive aggression of some
family members. But it is just as responsible for explaining why other
family members, rather than being aggressive, were flashers. In other
words, there is as much rationale for going on about the “drop your pants
gene” as the “warrior gene.”
Probably the biggest reason to reject warrior-gene determinism
nonsense is something that should be utterly predictable by now: MAO-
A effects on behavior show strong gene/environment interactions.
This brings us to a hugely important 2002 study, one of my favorites,
by Avshalom Caspi and colleagues at Duke University.44 The authors
followed a large cohort of children from birth to age twenty-six, studying
their genetics, upbringing, and adult behavior. Did MAO-A variant status
predict antisocial behavior in twenty-six-year-olds (as measured by a
253