for an opponent in a game).* There’s debate as to whether the decline in
frontal regulation in these circumstances represents impaired capacity for
self-control or impaired motivation for it. But either way, over the course
of seconds to minutes, the amount of energy reaching the brain and the
amount of energy the frontal cortex needs have something to do with
whether the harder, more correct thing happens.
Thus, sensory information streaming toward your brain from both the
outside world and your body can rapidly, powerfully, and automatically
alter behavior. In the minutes before our prototypical behavior occurs,
more complex stimuli influence us as well.
Unconscious Language Effects
Words have power. They can save, cure, uplift, devastate, deflate,
and kill. And unconscious priming with words influences pro- and
antisocial behaviors.
One of my favorite examples concerns the Prisoner’s Dilemma, the
economic game where participants decide whether to cooperate or
compete at various junctures.29 And behavior is altered by “situational
labels”—call the game the “Wall Street Game,” and people become less
cooperative. Calling it the “Community Game” does the opposite.
Similarly, have subjects read seemingly random word lists before
playing. Embedding warm fuzzy prosocial words in the list—“help,”
“harmony,” “fair,” “mutual”—fosters cooperation, while words like
“rank,” “power,” “fierce,” and “inconsiderate” foster the opposite. Mind
you, this isn’t subjects reading either Christ’s Sermon on the Mount or
Ayn Rand. Just an innocuous string of words. Words unconsciously shift
thoughts and feelings. One person’s “terrorist” is another’s “freedom
fighter”; politicians jockey to commandeer “family values,” and
somehow you can’t favor both “choice” and “life.”*30
There are more examples. In Nobel Prize–winning research, Daniel
Kahneman and Amos Tversky famously showed word framing altering
decision making. Subjects decide whether to administer a hypothetical
drug. If they’re told, “The drug has a 95 percent survival rate,” people,
including doctors, are more likely to approve it than when told, “The
drug has a 5 percent death rate.”*31 Embed “rude” or “aggressive”
(versus “considerate” or “polite”) in word strings, and subjects interrupt
92