wreaking serious havoc. And this is also the world of maternal substance
abuse producing heroin and crack babies or fetal alcohol syndrome.
Importantly, maternal stress impacts fetal development. There are
indirect routes—for example, stressed people consume less healthy diets
and consume more substances of abuse. More directly, stress alters
maternal blood pressure and immune defenses, which impact a fetus.
Most important, stressed mothers secrete glucocorticoids, which enter
fetal circulation and basically have the same bad consequences as in
stressed infants and children.
Glucocorticoids accomplish this through organizational effects on
fetal brain construction and decreasing levels of growth factors, numbers
of neurons and synapses, and so on. Just as prenatal testosterone
exposure generates an adult brain that is more sensitive to environmental
triggers of aggression, excessive prenatal glucocorticoid exposure
produces an adult brain more sensitive to environmental triggers of
depression and anxiety.
In addition, prenatal glucocorticoid exposure has effects that blend
classical developmental biology with molecular biology. To appreciate
this, here’s a highly simplified version of the next chapter’s focus on
genes: (a) each gene specifies the production of a specific type of
protein; (b) a gene has to be “activated” for the protein to be produced
and “deactivated” to stop producing it—thus genes come with on/off
switches; (c) every cell in our bodies contains the same library of genes;
(d) during development, the pattern of which genes are activated
determines which cells turn into nose, which into toes, and so on; (e)
forever after, nose, toes, and other cells retain distinctive patterns of gene
activation.
Chapter 4 discussed how some hormones have activational effects by
altering on/off switches on particular genes (e.g., testosterone-activating
genes related to increased growth in muscle cells). The field of
“epigenetics” concerns how some hormonal organizational effects arise
from permanently turning particular genes on or off in particular cells.75
Plenty more on this in the next chapter.
This helps explain why your toes and nose work differently. More
important, epigenetic changes also occur in the brain.
This domain of epigenetics was uncovered in a landmark 2004 study
by Meaney and colleagues, one of the most cited papers published in the
prestigious journal Nature Neuroscience. They had shown previously
221