made, or the amount of testosterone secreted. Instead, it correlated with
the extent of anxiety displayed (e.g., teeth chattering, or self-scratching).
The amygdala is linked to social uncertainty in other ways. In one
neuroimaging study, a subject would participate in a competitive game
against a group of other players; outcomes were rigged so that the
subject would wind up in the middle of the rankings.15 Experimenters
then manipulated game outcomes so that subjects’ rankings either
remained stable or fluctuated wildly. Stable rankings activated parts of
the frontal cortex that we’ll soon consider. Instability activated the
frontal cortex plus the amygdala. Being unsure of your place is
unsettling.
Another study explored the neurobiology of conforming.16 To
simplify, a subject is part of a group (where, secretly, the rest are
confederates); they are shown “X,” then asked, “What did you see?”
Everyone else says “Y.” Does the subject lie and say “Y” also? Often.
Subjects who stuck to their guns with “X” showed amygdala activation.
Finally, activating specific circuits within the amygdala in mice turns
anxiety on and off; activating others made mice unable to distinguish
between safe and anxiety-producing settings.*17
The amygdala also helps mediate both innate and learned fear.18 The
core of innate fear (aka a phobia) is that you don’t have to learn by trial
and error that something is aversive. For example, a rat born in a lab,
who has interacted only with other rats and grad students, instinctually
fears and avoids the smell of cats. While different phobias activate
somewhat different brain circuitry (for example, dentist phobia involves
the cortex more than does snake phobia), they all activate the amygdala.
Such innate fear contrasts with things we learn to fear—a bad
neighborhood, a letter from the IRS. The dichotomy between innate and
learned fear is actually a bit fuzzy.19 Everyone knows that humans are
innately afraid of snakes and spiders. But some people keep them as pets,
give them cute names.* Instead of inevitable fear, we show “prepared
learning”—learning to be afraid of snakes and spiders more readily than
of pandas or beagles.
The same occurs in other primates. For example, lab monkeys who
have never encountered snakes (or artificial flowers) can be conditioned
to fear the former more readily than the latter. As we’ll see in the next
chapter, humans show prepared learning, being predisposed to be
conditioned to fear people with a certain type of appearance.
41