These differing emphases explain a lot—for example, the classical
liberal view is that everyone has equal rights to happiness; rightists
instead discount fairness in favor of expedient authority, generating the
classical conservative view that some socioeconomic inequality is a
tolerable price for things running smoothly.
What does it mean that, in Haidt’s view, conservatives count up six
(moral foundations) on their toes and liberals only three? Here is where
internecine sniping starts. Conservatives embrace Haidt’s
characterization of liberals as being morally impoverished, with half
their moral foundations atrophied.* The opposite interpretation,
espoused by Jost, and Joshua Greene of Harvard, is that liberals have
more refined moral foundations, having jettisoned the less important,
more historically damaging ones that conservatives perseverate on—in
effect, liberals count from one to three, while conservatives really only
count four to six.
Why are conservatives more concerned with “binding foundations”
like loyalty, authority, and sanctity, often stepping-stones to right-wing
authoritarianism and social-dominance orientation? This segues to the
next section.
AFFECTIVE PSYCHOLOGICAL DIFFERENCES
Research consistently shows that leftists and rightists differ in
overlapping categories of emotional makeup. To summarize: on the
average, rightists are made more anxious by ambiguity and have a
stronger need for closure, dislike novelty, are more comforted by
structure and hierarchy, more readily perceive circumstances as
threatening, and are more parochial in their empathy.
The conservative dislike of ambiguity has been demonstrated in
numerous apolitical contexts (e.g., responses to visual illusions, taste in
entertainment) and is closely related to the differing feelings about
novelty, which by definition evokes ambiguity and uncertainty.39 The
differing views of novelty certainly explain the liberal view that with
correct reforms, our best days are ahead of us in a novel future, whereas
conservatives view our best days as behind us, in familiar circumstances
that should be returned to, to make things great again. Once again, these
differences in psychological makeup play out in apolitical realms as well
—liberals are more likely to own travel books than are conservatives.
451