The entire stretch of nucleotides that codes for a single type of
protein is called a gene. The entire collection of DNA is called the
genome, coding for all of the tens of thousands of genes in an organism;
“sequencing” the genome means determining the unique sequence of the
billions of nucleotides that make up that organism’s genome. That stretch
of DNA is so long (containing roughly twenty thousand genes in
humans) that it has to be broken into separate volumes, called
chromosomes.
This produces a spatial problem. The DNA library is found in the
center of the cell, in the nucleus. Proteins, however, occur all over the
cell, are constructed all over it (just think of proteins in the axon
terminals of a spinal neuron in a blue whale, terminals that are light-
years away from that neuron’s nucleus). How do you get the DNA
information out to where the protein is made? There is an intermediary
that completes the picture. The unique nucleotide sequence in DNA that
codes for a particular gene is copied into a string of similar nucleotide
letters in a related compound called RNA. Any given chromosome
contains a staggeringly long stretch of DNA, coding for one gene after
another; in contrast, this stretch of RNA is only as long as the particular
gene. In other words, a more manageable length. That RNA is then
shipped to wherever it is supposed to be in the cell, where it then directs
which amino acids are strung together in which sequence to form a
protein (and there are amino acids floating around in a cell, ready to be
grabbed for the protein-construction project). Think of RNA as a
photocopy of a single page out of this vast twenty-thousand-page-long
DNA encyclopedia. (And multiple copies of the cognate protein can be
made from the instructions in a photocopy page of RNA. This sure helps
in circumstances where copies of the protein must wind up in each of the
thousands of a single neuron’s axon terminals.)
This produces what is termed the “central dogma” of life, a concept
first framed in the early 1960s by Francis Crick, half of the renowned
Watson and Crick, who discovered the “double helix” structure of DNA
(with more than a little purloined help from Rosalind Franklin, but that’s
another story). Crick’s central dogma holds that the nucleotide sequence
of DNA that composes a gene determines how a unique stretch of RNA
is put together . . . which determines how a unique stretch of amino acids
are put together . . . which determines the shape(s) of the resulting
protein . . . which determines that protein’s function. DNA determines
713