“premotor cortex,” sitting just behind it, which then passes it to the
“motor cortex,” which talks to your muscles. And a behavior ensues.*
Before considering how the frontal cortex influences social behavior,
let’s start with a simpler domain of its function.
The Frontal Cortex and Cognition
What does “doing the harder thing when it’s the right thing to do”
look like in the realm of cognition (defined by Princeton’s Jonathan
Cohen as “the ability to orchestrate thought and action in accordance
with internal goals”)?38 Suppose you’ve looked up a phone number in a
city where you once lived. The frontal cortex not only remembers it long
enough to dial but also considers it strategically. Just before dialing, you
consciously recall that it is in that other city and retrieve your memory of
the city’s area code. And then you remember to dial “1” before the area
code.*
The frontal cortex is also concerned with focusing on a task. If you
step off the curb planning to jaywalk, you look at traffic, paying attention
to motion, calculating whether you can cross safely. If you step off
looking for a taxi, you pay attention to whether a car has one of those lit
taxicab thingies on top. In a great study, monkeys were trained to look at
a screen of dots of various colors moving in particular directions;
depending on a signal, a monkey had to pay attention to either color or
movement. Each signal indicating a shift in tasks triggered a burst of
PFC activity and, coupled with that, suppression of the stream of
information (color or movement) that was now irrelevant. This is the
PFC getting you to do the harder thing; remembering that the rule has
changed, don’t do the previous habitual response.39
The frontal cortex also mediates “executive function”—considering
bits of information, looking for patterns, and then choosing a strategic
action.40 Consider this truly frontally demanding test. The experimenter
tells a masochistic volunteer, “I’m going to the market and I’m going to
buy peaches, cornflakes, laundry detergent, cinnamon . . .” Sixteen items
recited, the volunteer is asked to repeat the list. Maybe they correctly
recall the first few, the last few, list some near misses—say, nutmeg
instead of cinnamon. Then the experimenter repeats the same list. This
51