to talk afterward about how it was. We construct cultures premised on
beliefs concerning the nature of life and can transmit those beliefs
multigenerationally, even between two individuals separated by
millennia—just consider that perennial best seller, the Bible. Consonant
with that, we can harm by doing things as unprecedented as and no more
physically taxing than pulling a trigger, or nodding consent, or looking
the other way. We can be passive-aggressive, damn with faint praise, cut
with scorn, express contempt with patronizing concern. All species are
unique, but we are unique in some pretty unique ways.
Here are two examples of just how strange and unique humans can
be when they go about harming one another and caring for one another.
The first example involves, well, my wife. So we’re in the minivan, our
kids in the back, my wife driving. And this complete jerk cuts us off,
almost causing an accident, and in a way that makes it clear that it wasn’t
distractedness on his part, just sheer selfishness. My wife honks at him,
and he flips us off. We’re livid, incensed. Asshole-where’s-the-cops-
when-you-need-them, etc. And suddenly my wife announces that we’re
going to follow him, make him a little nervous. I’m still furious, but this
doesn’t strike me as the most prudent thing in the world. Nonetheless,
my wife starts trailing him, right on his rear.
After a few minutes the guy’s driving evasively, but my wife’s on
him. Finally both cars stop at a red light, one that we know is a long one.
Another car is stopped in front of the villain. He’s not going anywhere.
Suddenly my wife grabs something from the front seat divider, opens her
door, and says, “Now he’s going to be sorry.” I rouse myself feebly
—“Uh, honey, do you really think this is such a goo—” But she’s out of
the car, starts pounding on his window. I hurry over just in time to hear
my wife say, “If you could do something that mean to another person,
you probably need this,” in a venomous voice. She then flings something
in the window. She returns to the car triumphant, just glorious.
“What did you throw in there!?”
She’s not talking yet. The light turns green, there’s no one behind us,
and we just sit there. The thug’s car starts to blink a very sensible turn
indicator, makes a slow turn, and heads down a side street into the dark
at, like, five miles an hour. If it’s possible for a car to look ashamed, this
car was doing it.
“Honey, what did you throw in there, tell me?”
She allows herself a small, malicious grin.
18