making that baffles citizens of other democracies, namely voting for
“likability.” Just consider Bush v. Kerry in 2004, where Republican
pundits suggested that people’s choice for the most powerful position on
earth should reflect which guy you’d rather have a beer with.
At least as interesting are the automatic and unconscious elements of
decision making. As probably the strongest factor, of candidates with
identical political stances, people are more likely to vote for the better-
looking one. Given the preponderance of male candidates and
officeholders, this mostly translates into voting for masculine traits—tall,
healthy-looking, symmetrical features, high forehead, prominent brow
ridges, jutting jaw.27
As first raised in chapter 3, this fits into the larger phenomenon of
attractive people typically being rated as having better personalities and
higher moral standards and as being kinder, more honest, more friendly,
and more trustworthy. And they are treated better—for the same résumé,
being more likely to be hired; for the same job, getting a higher salary;
for the same crime, being less likely to be convicted. This is the beauty-
is-good stereotype, summarized in an 1882 quote by Friedrich Schiller:
“Physical beauty is the sign of an interior beauty, a spiritual and moral
beauty.”28 This is the flip side of the view that disfigurement, illness, and
injury are karmic payback for one’s sins. And as we saw in chapter 3, we
use the same circuitry in the orbitofrontal PFC when we evaluate the
moral goodness of an act and the beauty of a face.
Other implicit factors come into play. One study examined the
campaign speeches of candidates in every prime minister election in
Australian history.29 In 80 percent of elections the winner was the one to
use more collective pronouns (i.e., “we” and “us”), suggesting an
attraction to candidates who speak on everyone’s behalf.
There are also contingent automatic preferences. For example, in
scenarios concerning war, both Western and East Asian subjects prefer
candidates with older, more masculine faces; during peacetime, it’s
younger, more feminine faces. Furthermore, in scenarios involving
fostering cooperation between groups, intelligent-looking faces are
preferred; at other times more intelligent faces are viewed as less
masculine or desirable.30
These automatic biases fall into place early in life. One study showed
kids, ages five to thirteen, pairs of faces of candidates from obscure
elections and asked them whom they’d prefer as captain on a
444