consult each other before making individual choices in a task.
Testosterone made subjects more likely to think their opinion was correct
and to ignore input from their partner. Testosterone makes people cocky,
egocentric, and narcissistic.6
Testosterone boosts impulsivity and risk taking, making people do
the easier thing when it’s the dumb-ass thing to do.7 Testosterone does
this by decreasing activity in the prefrontal cortex and its functional
coupling to the amygdala and increasing amygdaloid coupling with the
thalamus—the source of that shortcut path of sensory information into
the amygdala. Thus, more influence by split-second, low-accuracy inputs
and less by the let’s-stop-and-think-about-this frontal cortex.
Being fearless, overconfident, and delusionally optimistic sure feels
good. No surprise, then, that testosterone can be pleasurable. Rats will
work (by pressing levers) to be infused with testosterone and show
“conditioned place preference,” returning to a random corner of the cage
where infusions occur. “I don’t know why, but I feel good whenever I
stand there.”8,9
The underlying neurobiology fits perfectly. Dopamine is needed for
place-preference conditioning to occur, and testosterone increases
activity in the ventral tegmentum, the source of those mesolimbic and
mesocortical dopamine projections. Moreover, conditioned place
preference is induced when testosterone is infused directly into the
nucleus accumbens, the ventral tegmentum’s main projection target.
When a rat wins a fight, the number of testosterone receptors increases in
the ventral tegmentum and accumbens, increasing sensitivity to the
hormone’s feel-good effects.10
So testosterone does subtle things to behavior. Nonetheless, this
doesn’t tell us much because everything can be interpreted every which
way. Testosterone increases anxiety—you feel threatened and become
more reactively aggressive. Testosterone decreases anxiety—you feel
cocky and overconfident, become more preemptively aggressive.
Testosterone increases risk taking—“Hey, let’s gamble and invade.”
Testosterone increases risk taking—“Hey, let’s gamble and make a peace
offer.” Testosterone makes you feel good—“Let’s start another fight,
since the last one went swell.” Testosterone makes you feel good
—“Let’s all hold hands.”
It’s a crucial unifying concept that testosterone’s effects are hugely
context dependent.
102