THE BIOLOGICAL PROFILE
A
ll these forms of adversity are obviously stressful and cause
abnormalities in stress physiology. Across numerous species,
major early-life stressors produce both kids and adults with elevated
levels of glucocorticoids (along with CRH and ACTH, the hypothalamic
and pituitary hormones that regulate glucocorticoid release) and
hyperactivity of the sympathetic nervous system.32 Basal glucocorticoid
levels are elevated—the stress response is always somewhat activated—
and there is delayed recovery back to baseline after a stressor. Michael
Meaney of McGill University has shown how early-life stress
permanently blunts the ability of the brain to rein in glucocorticoid
secretion.
As covered in chapter 4, marinating the brain in excess
glucocorticoids, particularly during development, adversely effects
cognition, impulse control, empathy, and so on.33 There is impaired
hippocampal-dependent learning in adulthood. For example, abused
children who develop PTSD have decreased volume of the hippocampus
in adulthood. Stanford psychiatrist Victor Carrion has shown decreased
hippocampal growth within months of the abuse. As a likely cause,
glucocorticoids decrease hippocampal production of the growth factor
BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor).
So childhood adversity impairs learning and memory. Crucially, it
also impairs maturation and function of the frontal cortex; again,
glucocorticoids, via inhibiting BDNF, are likely culprits.
The connection between childhood adversity and frontocortical
maturation pertains to childhood poverty. Work by Martha Farah of the
University of Pennsylvania, Tom Boyce of UCSF, and others
demonstrates something outrageous: By age five, the lower a child’s
socioeconomic status, on the average, the (a) higher the basal
glucocorticoid levels and/or the more reactive the glucocorticoid stress
response, (b) the thinner the frontal cortex and the lower its metabolism,
and (c) the poorer the frontal function concerning working memory,
emotion regulation, impulse control, and executive decision making;
moreover, to achieve equivalent frontal regulation, lower-SES kids must
195