populations that subsist on dairy—pastoralists like Mongolian nomads or
East African Maasai—and is virtually nonexistent in populations that
don’t use dairy after weaning—Chinese and Southeast Asians. Lactase
persistence evolved and spread in a fraction of a geologic blink of an eye
—in the last ten thousand years or so, coevolving with domestication of
dairy animals.
Other genes have spread in humans even faster. For example, a
variant of a gene called ASPM, which is involved in cell division during
brain development, has emerged and spread to about 20 percent of
humans in the last 5,800 years.69 And genes that confer resistance to
malaria (at the cost of other diseases, such as sickle-cell disease or the
thalassemias) are even younger.
Still, thousands of years counts as fast only for snail shell obsessives.
However, evolution has been observed in real time. A classic example is
the work of the Princeton evolutionary biologists Peter and Rosemary
Grant, who, over the course of decades of work in the Galapagos,
demonstrated substantial evolutionary change in Darwin’s finches.
Evolutionary change in humans has occurred in genes related to
metabolism, when populations transition from traditional to Westernized
diets (e.g., Pacific Islanders from Nauru, Native Americans of the Pima
tribe in Arizona). The first generations with Westernized diets develop
catastrophically high rates of obesity, hypertension, adult-onset diabetes,
and death at early ages, thanks to “thrifty” genotypes that are great at
storing nutrients, honed by millennia of sparser diets. But within a few
generations diabetes rates begin to subside, as there is an increased
prevalence in the population of “sloppier” metabolic genotypes.70
Thus, there are examples of rapid changes in gene frequencies in real
time. Are there examples of gradualism? That’s hard to show because
gradual change is, er, gradual. A great example, however, comes from
decades of work by Richard Lenski of Michigan State University. He has
cultured E. coli bacteria colonies under constant conditions for 58,000
generations, roughly equivalent to a million years of human evolution.
Over that time, different colonies have gradually evolved in distinctive
ways, becoming more adapted.71
Thus, both gradualism and punctuated change occur in evolution,
probably depending upon the genes involved—for example, there has
been faster evolution of genes expressed in some brain regions than
others. And no matter how rapid the changes, there’s always some
382