EVOLUTION 101
E
volution rests on three steps: (a) certain biological traits are
inherited by genetic means; (b) mutations and gene recombination
produce variation in those traits; (c) some of those variants confer more
“fitness” than others. Given those conditions, over time the frequency of
more “fit” gene variants increases in a population.
We start by trashing some common misconceptions.
First, that evolution favors survival of the fittest. Instead evolution is
about reproduction, passing on copies of genes. An organism living
centuries but not reproducing is evolutionarily invisible.* The difference
between survival and reproduction is shown with “antagonistic
pleiotropy,” referring to traits that increase reproductive fitness early in
life yet decrease life span. For example, primates’ prostates have high
metabolic rates, enhancing sperm motility. Upside: enhanced fertility;
downside: increased risk of prostate cancer. Antagonistic pleiotropy
occurs dramatically in salmon, who epically journey to their spawning
grounds to reproduce and then die. If evolution were about survival
rather than passing on copies of genes, there’d be no antagonistic
pleiotropy.2
Another misconception is that evolution can select for preadaptations
—neutral traits that prove useful in the future. This doesn’t happen;
selection is for traits pertinent to the present. Related to this is the
misconception that living species are somehow better adapted than
extinct species. Instead, the latter were just as well adapted, until
environmental conditions changed sufficiently to do them in; the same
awaits us. Finally, there’s the misconception that evolution directionally
selects for greater complexity. Yes, if once there were only single-celled
organisms and there are multicellular ones now, average complexity has
increased. Nonetheless, evolution doesn’t necessarily select for greater
complexity—just consider bacteria decimating humans with some
plague.
The final misconception is that evolution is “just a theory.” I will
boldly assume that readers who have gotten this far believe in evolution.
Opponents inevitably bring up that irritating canard that evolution is
331