AGAIN WITH BABIES AND ANIMALS
M
uch as infants demonstrate the rudiments of hierarchical and
Us/Them thinking, they possess building blocks of moral
reasoning as well. For starters, infants have the bias concerning
commission versus omission. In one clever study, six-month-olds
watched a scene containing two of the same objects, one blue and one
red; repeatedly, the scene would show a person picking the blue object.
Then, one time, the red one is picked. The kid becomes interested, looks
more, breathes faster, showing that this seems discrepant. Now, the scene
shows two of the same objects, one blue, one a different color. In each
repetition of the scene, a person picks the one that is not blue (its color
changes with each repetition). Suddenly, the blue one is picked. The kid
isn’t particularly interested. “He always picks the blue one” is easier to
comprehend than “He never picks the blue one.” Commission is
weightier.11
Infants and toddlers also have hints of a sense of justice, as shown by
Kiley Hamlin of the University of British Columbia, and Paul Bloom and
Karen Wynn of Yale. Six- to twelve-month-olds watch a circle moving
up a hill. A nice triangle helps to push it. A mean square blocks it.
Afterward the infants can reach for a triangle or a square. They choose
the triangle.* Do infants prefer nice beings, or shun mean ones? Both.
Nice triangles were preferred over neutral shapes, which were preferred
over mean squares.
Such infants advocate punishing bad acts. A kid watches puppets,
one good, one bad (sharing versus not). The child is then presented with
the puppets, each sitting on a pile of sweets. Who should lose a sweet?
The bad puppet. Who should gain one? The good puppet.
Remarkably, toddlers even assess secondary punishment. The good
and bad puppets then interact with two additional puppets, who can be
nice or bad. And whom did kids prefer of those second-layer puppets?
Those who were nice to nice puppets and those who punished mean
ones.
Other primates also show the beginnings of moral judgments. Things
started with a superb 2003 paper by Frans de Waal and Sarah Brosnan.12
484