transcribed), requiring only one transcription factor.
Now consider a genome consisting of genes A and B, meaning three
different transcription profiles—A is transcribed, B is transcribed, A and
B are transcribed—requiring three different TFs (assuming you activate
only one at a time).
Three genes, seven transcription profiles: A, B, C, A + B, A + C, B +
C, A + B + C. Seven different TFs.
Four genes, fifteen profiles. Five genes, thirty-one profiles.*
As the number of genes in a genome increases, the number of
possible expression profiles increases exponentially. As does the number
of TFs needed to produce those profiles.
Now another wrinkle that, in the lingo of an ancient generation, will
blow your mind.
TFs are usually proteins, coded for by genes. Back to genes A and B.
To fully exploit them, you need the TF that activates gene A, and the TF
that activates gene B, and the TF that activates genes A and B. Thus
there must exist three more genes, each coding for one of those TFs.
Requiring TFs that activate those genes. And TFs for the genes coding
for those TFs . . .
Whoa. Genomes aren’t infinite; instead TFs regulate one another’s
transcription, solving that pesky infinity problem. Importantly, across the
species whose genomes have been sequenced, the longer the genome
(i.e., roughly the more genes there are), the greater the percentage of
genes coding for TFs. In other words, the more genomically complex the
organism, the larger the percentage of the genome devoted to gene
regulation by the environment.
Back to mutations. Can there be mutations in DNA stretches
constituting promoters? Yes, and more often than in genes themselves. In
the 1970s Allan Wilson and Mary-Claire King at Berkeley correctly
theorized that the evolution of genes is less important than the evolution
of regulatory sequences upstream of genes (and thus how the
environment regulates genes). Reflecting that, a disproportionate share of
genetic differences between chimps and humans are in genes for TFs.
Time for more complexity. Suppose you have genes 1–10, and
transcription factors A, B, and C. TF-A induces the transcription of
genes 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9. TF-B induces genes 1, 2, 5, and 6. TF-C induces
1, 5, and 10. Thus, upstream of gene 1 are separate promoters responding
to TFs A, B, and C—thus genes can be regulated by multiple TFs.
229