you think, “Okay, sit still, breathe slowly.” Typically this causes even
greater activation of the amygdala and sympathetic nervous system.
Antecedent strategies generally work better, as they keep the barn
door closed from the start. These are about thinking/feeling about
something else (e.g., that great vacation), or thinking/feeling differently
about what you’re seeing (reappraisals such as “That isn’t real; those are
just actors”). And when done right, the PFC, particularly the dlPFC,
activates, the amygdala and sympathetic nervous system are damped,
and subjective distress decreases.*
Antecedent reappraisal is why placebos work.69 Thinking, “My
finger is about to be pricked by a pin,” activates the amygdala along with
a circuit of pain-responsive brain regions, and the pin hurts. Be told
beforehand that the hand cream being slathered on your finger is a
powerful analgesic cream, and you think, “My finger is about to be
pricked by a pin, but this cream will block the pain.” The PFC activates,
blunting activity in the amygdala and pain circuitry, as well as pain
perception.
Thought processes like these, writ large, are the core of a particularly
effective type of psychotherapy—cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)—
for the treatment of disorders of emotion regulation.70 Consider someone
with a social anxiety disorder caused by a horrible early experience with
trauma. To simplify, CBT is about providing the tools to reappraise
circumstances that evoke the anxiety—remember that in this social
situation those awful feelings you’re having are about what happened
back then, not what is happening now.*
Controlling emotional responses with thought like this is very top
down; the frontal cortex calms the overwrought amygdala. But the
PFC/limbic relationship can be bottom up as well, when a decision
involves a gut feeling. This is the backbone of Damasio’s somatic marker
hypothesis. Choosing among options can involve a cerebral cost-benefit
analysis. But it also involves “somatic markers,” internal simulations of
what each outcome would feel like, run in the limbic system and
reported to the vmPFC. The process is not a thought experiment; it’s an
emotion experiment, in effect an emotional memory of a possible future.
A mild somatic marker activates only the limbic system.71 “Should I
do behavior A? Maybe not—the possibility of outcome B feels scary.” A
more vivid somatic marker activates the sympathetic nervous system as
well. “Should I do behavior A? Definitely not—I can feel my skin
63