think I saw B; in fact I’m certain of it.” The latter is associated with
activation of the hippocampus, the brain region central to learning and
memory—the revisionism involves you literally revising your memory.
Remarkably, in another study this process of conforming was also
associated with activation of the occipital cortex, the brain region that
does the primary processing of vision—you can almost hear the frontal
and limbic parts of the brain trying to convince the occipital cortex that it
saw something different from what it actually saw. As has been said,
winners (in this case, in the court of public opinion) get to write the
history books, and everyone else better revise theirs accordingly. War is
peace. Freedom is slavery. That dot you saw was actually blue, not red.61
Thus the neurobiology of conforming consists of a first wave of
anxiety where we equate differentness with wrongness, followed by the
cognitive work needed to change our opinion. These findings obviously
come from an artificial world of psych experiments. Thus they’re only a
faint whisper of what occurs when it’s you against the rest of the jury,
when it’s you being urged to join the lynch mob, when it’s you choosing
between conforming and being deeply lonely.
What is the neurobiology of obedience to authority, when you’re
being ordered to do something wrong? A similar mixture as with
conformity, with the vmPFC and the dlPFC mud-wrestling, with indices
of anxiety and glucocorticoid stress hormones showing up to bias you
toward subordination. Which leads us to consider classic studies of “just
following orders.”
Asch, Milgram, and Zimbardo
The neurobiology of conformity and obedience won’t soon be
revealing much about the core question in this field: if the circumstances
are right, is every human capable of doing something appalling simply
because they’ve been ordered to, because everyone else is doing it?
It is virtually required by law to discuss three of the most influential,
daring, disturbing, and controversial studies in the history of psychology,
namely the conformity experiments of Solomon Asch, the
shock/obedience studies of Stanley Milgram, and the Stanford Prison
Experiment of Philip Zimbardo.
460