leave their natal group around adolescence, when humans in traditional
society marry someone from another group and go live with them, they
maintain contact with their family of origin.54
Moreover, from New Guinea highlanders to the Hatfields and
McCoys, feuds and vendettas occur along clan lines of relatedness. We
typically bequeath our money and land among our descendants rather
than among strangers. From ancient Egypt to North Korea and on to the
Kennedys and Bushes, we have dynastic rule. How’s this for a display of
human kin selection: Subjects were given a scenario of a bus hurtling
toward a human and a nondescript dog, and they could only save one.
Whom would they pick? It depended on degree of relatedness, as one
progressed from sibling (1 percent chose the dog over the sibling) to
grandparent (2 percent) to distant cousin (16 percent) to foreigner (26
percent).55
As another measure of the importance of kinship in human
interactions, people can’t be compelled to testify in court against a first-
degree relative in many countries and American states. And when
humans have damage to the (emotional) vmPFC, they become so
unemotionally utilitarian that they would choose to harm family
members in order to save strangers.56
There’s a fascinating historical example of how wrong it feels when
someone chooses strangers over kin. This is the story of Pavlik Morozov,
a boy in Stalin’s Soviet Union.57 Young Pavlik, according to the official
story, was a model citizen, an ardent flag-waving patriot. In 1932 he
chose the state over his kin, denouncing his father (for supposed black
marketeering), who was promptly arrested and executed. Soon afterward
the boy was killed, allegedly by relatives who felt more strongly about
kin selection than he did.
The regime’s propagandists embraced the story. Statues of the young
martyr to the revolution were erected. Poems and songs were written;
schools were named for him. An opera was composed, a hagiographic
movie made.
As the story emerged, Stalin was told about the boy. And what was
the response of the man most benefiting from such fealty to the state?
Was it “If only all my citizens were that righteous; this lad gives me hope
for our future”? No. According to historian Vejas Liulevicius of the
University of Tennessee, when told about Pavlik, Stalin snorted
371