In the 1950s Lawrence Kohlberg, then a graduate student at the
University of Chicago and later a professor at Harvard, began
formulating his monumental stages of moral development.17
Kids would be presented with moral conundrums. For example: The
only dose of the only drug that will save a poor woman from dying is
prohibitively expensive. Should she steal it? Why?
Kohlberg concluded that moral judgment is a cognitive process, built
around increasingly complex reasoning as kids mature. He proposed his
famed three stages of moral development, each with two subparts.
You’ve been told not to eat the tempting cookie in front of you.
Should you eat it? Here are the painfully simplified stages of reasoning
that go into the decision:
Level 1: Should I Eat the Cookie? Preconventional
Reasoning
Stage 1. It depends. How likely am I to get punished? Being
punished is unpleasant. Aggression typically peaks around ages two
through four, after which kids are reined in by adults’ punishment (“Go
sit in the corner”) and peers (i.e., being ostracized).
Stage 2. It depends. If I refrain, will I get rewarded? Being rewarded
is nice.
Both stages are ego-oriented—obedience and self-interest (what’s in
it for me?). Kohlberg found that children are typically at this level up to
around ages eight through ten.
Concern arises when aggression, particularly if callous and
remorseless, doesn’t wane around these ages—this predicts an increased
risk of adult sociopathy (aka antisocial personality).* Crucially, the
behavior of future sociopaths seems impervious to negative feedback. As
noted, high pain thresholds in sociopaths help explain their lack of
empathy—it’s hard to feel someone else’s pain when you can’t feel your
own. It also helps explain the imperviousness to negative feedback—
why change your behavior if punishment doesn’t register?
It is also around this stage that kids first reconcile after conflicts and
derive comfort from reconciliation (e.g., decreasing glucocorticoid
secretion and anxiety). Those benefits certainly suggest self-interest
182