So what does the extent of exposure (as assessed by the ratio) predict
about adult behavior? Men with more “masculine” 2D:4D ratios tend
toward higher levels of aggression and math scores; more assertive
personalities; higher rates of ADHD and autism (diseases with strong
male biases); and decreased risk of depression and anxiety (disorders
with a female skew). The faces and handwriting of such men are judged
to be more “masculine.” Furthermore, some reports show a decreased
likelihood of being gay.
Women having a more “feminine” ratio have less chance of autism
and more of anorexia (a female-biased disease). They’re less likely to be
left-handed (a male-skewed trait). Moreover, they exhibit less athletic
ability and more attraction to highly masculine faces. And they’re more
likely to be straight or, if lesbian, more likely to take stereotypical female
sexual roles.72
This constitutes some of the strongest evidence that (a) fetal
androgen exposure has organizational effects on adult behavior in
humans as in other species, and (b) that individual differences in the
extent of such exposure predict individual differences in adult
behavior.*73 Prenatal endocrine environment is destiny.
Well, not exactly. These effects are small and variable, producing a
meaningful relationship only when considering large numbers of
individuals. Do testosterone’s organizational effects determine the
quality and/or quantity of aggression? No. How about the organizational
plus the activational effects? Not those either.
Expanding the Scope of “Environment”
Thus the fetal brain can be influenced by hormones secreted by the
fetus. But in addition, the outside world alters a pregnant woman’s
physiology, which in turn affects the fetal brain.
The most obvious version of this is how food ingested by a pregnant
female influences what nutrients are delivered to the fetal circulation.*
At an extreme, maternal malnutrition broadly impairs fetal brain
development.*74 Moreover, pathogens acquired by the mother can be
passed to the fetus—for example, the protozoan parasite Toxoplasma
gondii can infect someone pregnant (typically after exposure to infected
cat feces) and eventually reach the fetal nervous system, potentially
220