In reality, such primates think about gradations of rank. For example,
a baboon typically interacts differently with, say, the guy one step above
him in rank than the one five steps above. Furthermore, primates note
gradations that don’t directly concern them. Recall from chapter 10 how
researchers recorded vocalizations of individuals in a troop, splicing
them to invent social scenarios. Play a recording of number ten giving a
dominance call and number one responding with a subordination call,
and everyone pays attention: whoa, Bill Gates just panhandled a
homeless guy.
This can be abstracted further, as shown with ravens, which are
outrageously smart birds. As with baboons, vocalizations implying
dominance reversals command more attention than does the status quo.
Remarkably, this even occurs for reversals between birds in a
neighboring flock. Ravens discern dominance relations just by listening
and are interested in hierarchical gossip about a different group.
Next is the issue of variation within and among species as to what
life is like having a particular rank. Does being high ranking merely
mean that everyone keeps tabs on your mood or, at the other extreme,
that no one else is getting enough calories to ovulate, lactate, or survive?
How often do subordinates challenge dominant individuals? How readily
do dominant individuals vent their frustrations on subordinates? How
much do such subordinates have coping outlets (e.g., someone to groom
with)?
Then there is the issue of how high rank is attained. In many cases
(e.g., female baboons, as noted) rank is inherited, a system with kin
selection written all over it. In contrast, in other species/sexes (male
baboons, for example) ranks shift over time, changing as a function of
fights, showdowns, and Shakespearean melodrama, where rising in the
hierarchy is about brawn, sharp canines, and winning the right fight.*
Hurrah for clawing your way to the top, for sweaty, zero-sum,
muscular capitalism. But what about the more interesting issue of how
high rank, once attained, is maintained? As we’ll see, this has less to do
with muscle than with social skills.
This ushers in a key point—social competence is challenging, and
this is reflected in the brain. The British anthropologist Robin Dunbar
has shown that across various taxa (e.g., “birds,” “ungulates” or
“primates”), the bigger the average size of the social group in the
species, (a) the larger the brain, relative to total body size, and (b) the
430