and extended to various cultures).49 First is authoritative parenting.
Rules and expectations are clear, consistent, and explicable—“Because I
said so” is anathema—with room for flexibility; praise and forgiveness
trump punishment; parents welcome children’s input; developing
children’s potential and autonomy is paramount. By the standards of the
educated neurotics who would read (let alone write . . .) this book, this
produces a good adult outcome—happy, emotionally and socially mature
and fulfilled, independent and self-reliant.
Next is authoritarian parenting. Rules and demands are numerous,
arbitrary, and rigid and need no justification; behavior is mostly shaped
by punishment; children’s emotional needs are low priorities. Parental
motivation is often that it’s a tough, unforgiving world and kids better be
prepared. Authoritarian parenting tends to produce adults who may be
narrowly successful, obedient, conformist (often with an undercurrent of
resentment that can explode), and not particularly happy. Moreover,
social skills are often poor because, instead of learning by experience,
they grew up following orders.
And then there is permissive parenting, the aberration that
supposedly let Boomers invent the 1960s. There are few demands or
expectations, rules are rarely enforced, and children set the agenda.
Adult outcome: self-indulgent individuals with poor impulse control, low
frustration tolerance, plus poor social skills thanks to living
consequence-free childhoods.
Baumrind’s trio was expanded by Stanford psychologists Eleanor
Maccoby and John Martin to include neglectful parenting.50 This
addition produces a two-by-two matrix: parenting is authoritative (high
demand, high responsiveness), authoritarian (high demand, low
responsiveness), permissive (low demand, high responsiveness), or
neglectful (low demand, low responsiveness).
Importantly, each style usually produces adults with that same
approach, with different cultures valuing different styles.
Then comes the next way cultural values are transmitted to kids,
namely by peers. This was emphasized in Judith Rich Harris’s The
Nurture Assumption. Harris, a psychologist without an academic
affiliation or doctorate, took the field by storm, arguing that the
importance of parenting in shaping a child’s adult personality is
exaggerated.51 Instead, once kids pass a surprisingly young age, peers
are most influential. Elements of her argument included: (a) Parental
204