baboon troop it is more than two months before females first groom or
sexually solicit new transfer males; in this troop it was a matter of days
to weeks. Coupled with the lack of displacement aggression from
resident males, this caused the new-transfer males to gradually change,
assimilating into the troop culture in about six months. Thus, when
treated in a less aggressive, more affiliative manner, adolescent baboons
start doing the same.
In 1965 a rising star of primatology, Irven DeVore of Harvard,
published the first overview of the subject.49 Discussing his own
specialty, savanna baboons, he wrote that they “have acquired an
aggressive temperament as a defense against predators, and
aggressiveness cannot be turned on and off like a faucet. It is an integral
part of the monkeys’ personalities, so deeply rooted that it makes them
potential aggressors in every situation.” Thus savanna baboons became,
literally, textbook examples of an aggressive, stratified, male-dominated
primate. Yet as we see here, this picture is not universal or inevitable.
Humans have formed both small nomadic bands and megastates and
have demonstrated a flexibility whereby uprooted descendants of the
former function in the latter. Human mating patterns are atypically
flexible, and our societies feature monogamy, polygyny, or polyandry.
We have fashioned religions where certain types of violence earn you
paradise and others where the same violence consigns you to hell.
Basically, if baboons unexpectedly show this much social plasticity, so
can we. Anyone who says that our worst behaviors are inevitable knows
too little about primates, including us.
One Person
Somewhere between neurons, hormones, and genes on one hand and
culture, ecological influences, and evolution on the other, sits the
individual. And with more than seven billion of us, it’s easy to feel that
no single individual can make much of a difference.
But we know that’s not true. There’s the obligatory list of those who
changed everything—Mandela, Gandhi, MLK, Rosa Parks, Lincoln,
Aung San Suu Kyi. Yes, they often had scads of advisers. But they were
the catalysts, the ones who paid with their freedom or their lives. And
there are whistle-blowers who took great risks to trigger change—Daniel
Ellsberg, Karen Silkwood, W. Mark Felt (Watergate’s Deep Throat),
651