DRAWING LINES IN THE SAND
N
early everyone believes in the third proposition, that we are
somewhere between complete and no free will, that this notion of
free will is compatible with the deterministic laws of the universe as
embodied in biology. Only a subset of versions of this view fit the fairly
narrow philosophical stance called “compatibilism.” Instead this broader
view is that we have something resembling a spirit, a soul, an essence
that embodies our free will, from which emanates behavioral intent; and
that this spirit coexists with biology that can sometimes constrain it. It’s
a kind of libertarian dualism (“libertarian” in the philosophical rather
than political sense), what Greene calls “mitigated free will.” It’s
encapsulated in the idea that well-intentioned spirit, while willing, can be
thwarted by flesh that is sufficiently weak.
—
Let’s start with the definitive legal framing of mitigated free will.
In 1842 a Scotsman named Daniel M’Naghten tried to assassinate
British prime minister Robert Peel.10 He mistook Peel’s private secretary,
Edward Drummond, for the prime minister and shot him at close range,
killing him. At his arraignment M’Naghten stated, “The Tories in my
native city have compelled me to do this. They follow and persecute me
wherever I go, and have entirely destroyed my peace of mind. They
followed me to France, into Scotland . . . wherever I go. I cannot get no
rest from them night or day. I cannot sleep at night. . . . I believe they
have driven me into a consumption. I am sure I shall never be the man I
formerly was. . . . They wish to murder me. It can be proved by
evidence. . . . I was driven to desperation by persecution.”
In today’s terminology M’Naghten had some form of paranoid
psychosis. It may not have been schizophrenia—his delusional
symptoms started many years later than the typical age of onset of the
disease. Regardless of the diagnosis, M’Naghten had abandoned his
business and spent the previous two years wandering Europe, hearing
voices, convinced that he was being spied upon and persecuted by
powerful people, with Peel his most diabolical tormentor. In the words of
588