100,000 to a million people were persecuted, tortured, or killed as
witches in the aftermath.*28
I don’t think much of Kramer and Sprenger. My assumption is that
they were sadistic monsters, but that could reflect my being influenced
too much by the likes of The Name of the Rose or The Da Vinci Code.
Maybe they were opportunists who reasoned that the book would make
their careers. Maybe they were utterly sincere.
Instead I imagine a scenario of an evening during the late fifteenth
century. A church inquisitor comes home from work weary, burdened.
His wife coaxes him to talk—“It was a usual day of condemning
witches, but this one case bothered me. Everyone testified about this
woman who falls and gnashes and convulses—a witch, without a doubt.
I don’t feel sorry for her—no one told her to open wide for Satan. But
she had these two beautiful kids—you should have seen them, just so
confused as to why their mother was being taken away. Distraught
husband also. So that part was hard, seeing them suffer. But it is what it
is—we burned her, of course.” Burnings and killings and centuries were
to pass until we in the West would have learned enough to say, “It’s not
her; it’s her disease.”*
We’re only a first few baby steps into understanding any of this, so
few that it leaves huge, unexplained gaps that perfectly smart people fill
in with a homunculus. Nevertheless, even the staunchest believers in free
will must admit that it is hemmed into tighter spaces than in the past. It’s
less than two centuries since science first taught us that the frontal cortex
has something to do with appropriate behavior. Less than seventy years
since we learned that schizophrenia is a biochemical disorder. Perhaps
fifty years since we learned that reading problems of a type that we now
call dyslexia aren’t due to laziness but instead involve microscopic
cortical malformations. Twenty-five since we learned that epigenetics
alters behavior. The influential philosopher Daniel Dennett has written
about the free will that is “worth wanting.” If there really is free will, it’s
getting consigned to domains too mundane to be worth the effort to want
—do I want briefs or boxer shorts today?29
Recall those charts and table showing the recentness of these
scientific discoveries. If you believe that starting tonight, at midnight,
something will happen and science will stop, that there will be no new
publications, findings, or knowledge relevant to this book, that we now
know everything there is, then it is clear what one’s stance should be—
609