Cheap, cheap, cheap. Which makes sense. Nothing becomes obsolete
faster than a neurotransmitter after it has done its postsynaptic thing.
Yesterday’s newspaper is useful today only for house-training puppies.
Neuropharmacology
As these neurotransmitterology insights emerged, they allowed
scientists to begin to understand how various “neuroactive” and
“psychoactive” drugs and medicines work.
Broadly, such drugs fall into two categories: those that increase
signaling across a particular type of synapse, and those that decrease it.
We already saw some of the strategies for increasing signaling: (a)
Stimulate more synthesis of the neurotransmitter (for example, by
administering the precursor or using a drug that increases the activity of
the enzymes that synthesize the neurotransmitter). As an example,
Parkinson’s disease involves a loss of dopamine in one brain region, and
a staple of treatment is to boost dopamine levels by administering the
drug L-DOPA, which is the immediate precursor of dopamine. (b)
Administer a synthetic version of the neurotransmitter, or a drug that is
structurally close enough to the real thing to fool the receptors.
Psilocybin, for example, is structurally similar to serotonin and activates
a subtype of its receptors. (c) Stimulate the postsynaptic neuron to make
more receptors. Fine in theory, but not easily done. (d) Inhibit
degradative enzymes so that more of the neurotransmitter sticks around
in the synapse. (e) Inhibit the reuptake of the neurotransmitter,
prolonging its effects in the synapse. The modern antidepressant of
choice, Prozac, does exactly that in serotonin synapses. Thus it is often
referred to as an “SSRI”—a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
Meanwhile, a pharmacopeia of drugs are available to decrease
signaling across synapses, and you can see what their underlying
mechanisms are going to include—blocking the synthesis of a
neurotransmitter, blocking its release, blocking its access to its receptor,
and so on. Fun example: Acetylcholine stimulates your diaphragm to
contract. Curare, the poison used in darts by Amazonian tribes, blocks
acetylcholine receptors. You stop breathing.
A final, very relevant point—just as the threshold of the axon hillock
can change over time in response to experience, nearly every facet of the
693