basketball game. Our conversations are filled with military metaphors—
we rally the troops after our ideas get shot down. Our sports teams’
names celebrate violence—Warriors, Vikings, Lions, Tigers, and Bears.
We even think this way about something as cerebral as chess
—“Kasparov kept pressing for a murderous attack. Toward the end,
Kasparov had to oppose threats of violence with more of the same.”1 We
build theologies around violence, elect leaders who excel at it, and in the
case of so many women, preferentially mate with champions of human
combat. When it’s the “right” type of aggression, we love it.
It is the ambiguity of violence, that we can pull a trigger as an act of
hideous aggression or of self-sacrificing love, that is so challenging. As a
result, violence will always be a part of the human experience that is
profoundly hard to understand.
This book explores the biology of violence, aggression, and
competition—the behaviors and the impulses behind them, the acts of
individuals, groups, and states, and when these are bad or good things. It
is a book about the ways in which humans harm one another. But it is
also a book about the ways in which people do the opposite. What does
biology teach us about cooperation, affiliation, reconciliation, empathy,
and altruism?
The book has a number of personal roots. One is that, having had
blessedly little personal exposure to violence in my life, the entire
phenomenon scares the crap out of me. I think like an academic egghead,
believing that if I write enough paragraphs about a scary subject, give
enough lectures about it, it will give up and go away quietly. And if
everyone took enough classes about the biology of violence and studied
hard, we’d all be able to take a nap between the snoozing lion and lamb.
Such is the delusional sense of efficacy of a professor.
Then there’s the other personal root for this book. I am by nature
majorly pessimistic. Give me any topic and I’ll find a way in which
things will fall apart. Or turn out wonderfully and somehow, because of
that, be poignant and sad. It’s a pain in the butt, especially to people
stuck around me. And when I had kids, I realized that I needed to get
ahold of this tendency big time. So I looked for evidence that things
weren’t quite that bad. I started small, practicing on them—don’t cry, a T.
rex would never come and eat you; of course Nemo’s daddy will find
him. And as I’ve learned more about the subject of this book, there’s
been an unexpected realization—the realms of humans harming one
9