In other studies volunteers underwent either empathy training
(focusing on feeling the pain of someone in distress) or compassion
training (focusing on a feeling of warmth and care toward that distressed
person).51 The former would generate the typical neuroimaging profiles,
including heavy amygdala activation, and a negative, anxious state.
Those with compassion training did not, showing heavy activation
instead in the (cognitive) dlPFC, coupling of activation between the
dlPFC and dopaminergic regions, more positive emotions, and a greater
tendency toward prosociality.
Okay, caveats. This is a tiny literature (i.e., not much larger than the
study of Ricard). And all-star Buddhist monks apparently meditate eight
hours a day, not a trivial path to take. The point is merely to emphasize
this scenario of detachment. Which brings us to the next issue, which is
whether compassionate acts fostered by empathy are necessarily useful.
Doing Something Effectively
In a provocatively titled 2014 article, “Against Empathy,” Paul
Bloom explored the ways in which empathy can lead to compassionate
acts that are far from ideal.
There is the realm of what has been termed “pathological altruism,”
the type associated with codependency.52 This is the scenario of someone
so consumed with the vicarious pain of a loved one that they endure and
facilitate his dysfunction rather than administering tough love. Then
there’s the danger that the empathic pain is so intense that you can only
come up with solutions that would work for you, rather than ones that
might help the sufferer. And there is the problem of empathy impeding
your doing what’s necessary—it’s not great if a parent is so vicariously
distressed by their child being distressed that they forgo vaccinations. A
large piece of the training of health-care professionals is teaching them
to keep empathy at bay.* For example, the various behavioral and
neurobiological responses to seeing someone poked with a needle do not
occur in acupuncturists. As Jamison describes, when anxiously seeing a
doctor about something worrisome, “I needed to look at him and see the
opposite of my fear, not its echo.”
Bloom also emphasizes how highly aroused empathy pushes us
toward psychologically easy acts that generate the least cognitive load.
544