Meanwhile, by chance, most of the German soldiers were Saxons, who
expressed a cousinly affinity for British Anglo-Saxons, suggesting that
they should both be fighting the Prussians, the resented dominating
group in Germany.
And perhaps most important, the truce was aided by top-down
approval. Officers typically negotiated; figures such as the pope called
for a truce; it was a holiday that stood for peace and good will toward all
men.
Thus we have the Christmas Truce. Remarkably, something even
more miraculous occurred during the war. In what has been termed the
Live and Let Live phenomenon, soldiers in the trenches repeatedly
evolved stable truces without exchanging a word, without a shared
religious holiday, without the sanction of officers and leaders.
How did this occur? As documented by the historian Tony Ashworth
in Trench Warfare: 1914–1918, it would begin passively. Troops on both
sides ate around the same time, and guns would go silent then—who
wants to interrupt dinner in order to kill someone or be killed? The same
would occur during awful weather, when everyone’s priority became
flooded trenches or avoiding freezing to death.58
Mutual restraint also emerged in circumstances shadowed by the
future. Wagon trains delivering food were easy artillery targets but were
left unharmed, to prevent reciprocal shelling. Similarly, latrines were
spared.
These truces emerged when soldiers chose not to do something. But
truces were also established by overt action. How? Have your best sniper
put a bullet into the wall of an abandoned house near enemy lines. Then
have him do it again and again, repeatedly hitting the same spot. What
are you communicating? “Look how good our guy is. He could have
aimed at you instead but chose not to. What are you going to do about
it?” And the other side would reciprocate with their best sniper. An
agreement to shoot over each other’s heads had been established.
The key was ritualization—shooting repeatedly at the same
inconsequential target, renewing the commitment to peace daily at the
same time.
Live and Let Live truces could withstand perturbations. Soldiers
signaled the other side that they had to shoot for real for a while—
officers were coming. The system survived violations. If some gung-ho
rookie lobbed a shell into the others’ trenches, the most common
665