information, concluding, “Wow, my heart is racing; I must be terrified.”
In other words, you decide what you feel based on signals from your
body.
There’s support for the idea—three of my favorites are that (a)
forcing depressed people to smile makes them feel better; (b) instructing
people to take on a more “dominant” posture makes them feel more so
(lowers stress hormone levels); and (c) muscle relaxants decrease anxiety
(“Things are still awful, but if my muscles are so relaxed that I’m
dribbling out of this chair, things must be improving”). Nonetheless, a
strict version of James-Lange doesn’t work, because of the issue of
specificity—hearts race for varying reasons, so how does your brain
decide if it’s reacting to a lion or an exciting come-hither look?
Moreover, many autonomic responses are too slow to precede conscious
awareness of an emotion.26
Nonetheless, interoceptive information influences, if not determines,
our emotions. Some brain regions with starring roles in processing social
emotions—the PFC, insular cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and
amygdala—receive lots of interoceptive information. This helps explain
a reliable trigger of aggression, namely pain, which activates most of
those regions. As a repeating theme, pain does not cause aggression; it
amplifies preexisting tendencies toward aggression. In other words, pain
makes aggressive people more aggressive, while doing the opposite to
unaggressive individuals.27
Interoceptive information can alter behavior more subtly than in the
pain/aggression link.28 One example concerns how much the frontal
cortex has to do with willpower, harking back to material covered in the
last chapter. Various studies, predominantly by Roy Baumeister of
Florida State University, show that when the frontal cortex labors hard
on some cognitive task, immediately afterward individuals are more
aggressive and less empathic, charitable, and honest. Metaphorically, the
frontal cortex says, “Screw it. I’m tired and don’t feel like thinking about
my fellow human.”
This seems related to the metabolic costs of the frontal cortex doing
the harder thing. During frontally demanding tasks, blood glucose levels
drop, and frontal function improves if subjects are given a sugary drink
(with control subjects consuming a drink with a nonnutritive sugar
substitute). Moreover, when people are hungry, they become less
charitable and more aggressive (e.g., choosing more severe punishment
91