you answer, “It depends on the version of the gene.” “It depends” = a
gene/environment interaction.
Here are some classic examples concerning behavior:32
The disease phenylketonuria arises from a single gene mutation;
skipping over details, the mutation disables an enzyme that converts a
potentially neurotoxic dietary constituent, phenylalanine, into something
safe. Thus, if you eat a normal diet, phenylalanine accumulates,
damaging the brain. But eat a phenylalanine-free diet from birth, and
there is no damage. What are the effects of this mutation on brain
development? It depends on your diet. What’s the effect of diet on brain
development? It depends on whether you have this (rare) mutation.
Another gene/environment interaction pertains to depression, a
disease involving serotonin abnormalities.33 A gene called 5HTT codes
for a transporter that removes serotonin from the synapse; having a
particular 5HTT variant increases the risk of depression . . . but only
when coupled with childhood trauma.* What’s the effect of 5HTT
variant on depression risk? It depends on childhood trauma exposure.
What’s the effect of childhood trauma exposure on depression risk? It
depends on 5HTT variant (plus loads of other genes, but you get the
point).
Another example concerns FADS2, a gene involved in fat
metabolism.34 One variant is associated with higher IQ, but only in
breast-fed children. Same pair of “what’s the effect” questions, same “it
depends” answers.
One final gene/environment interaction was revealed in an important
1999 Science paper. The study was a collaboration among three
behavioral geneticists—one at Oregon Health Sciences University, one at
the University of Alberta, and one at the State University of New York in
Albany.35 They studied mouse strains known to have genetic variants
relevant to particular behaviors (e.g., addiction or anxiety). First they
ensured that the mice from a particular strain were essentially genetically
identical in all three labs. Then the scientists did cartwheels to test the
animals in identical conditions in the labs.
They standardized everything. Because some mice were born in the
lab but others came from breeders, homegrowns were given bouncy van
rides to simulate the jostling that commercially bred mice undergo
during shipping, just in case that was important. Animals were tested at
the same day of age on the same date at the same local time. Animals
246