Why? This is our world of habituation, where nothing is ever as good
as that first time.
Unfortunately, things have to work this way because of our range of
rewards.86 After all, reward coding must accommodate the rewarding
properties of both solving a math problem and having an orgasm.
Dopaminergic responses to reward, rather than being absolute, are
relative to the reward value of alternative outcomes. In order to
accommodate the pleasures of both mathematics and orgasms, the
system must constantly rescale to accommodate the range of intensity
offered by particular stimuli. The response to any reward must habituate
with repetition, so that the system can respond over its full range to the
next new thing.
This was shown in a beautiful study by Wolfram Schultz of
Cambridge University.87 Depending on the circumstance, monkeys were
trained to expect either two or twenty units of reward. If they
unexpectedly got either four or forty units, respectively, there’d be an
identical burst of dopamine release; giving one or ten units produced an
identical decrease. It was the relative, not absolute, size of the surprise
that mattered over a tenfold range of reward.
These studies show that the dopamine system is bidirectional.88 It
responds with scale-free increases for unexpected good news and
decreases for bad. Schultz demonstrated that following a reward, the
dopamine system codes for discrepancy from expectation—get what you
expected, and there’s a steady-state dribble of dopamine. Get more
reward and/or get it sooner than expected, and there’s a big burst; less
and/or later, a decrease. Some tegmental neurons respond to positive
discrepancy from expectation, others to negative; appropriately, the latter
are local neurons that release the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA.
Those same neurons participate in habituation, where the reward that
once elicited a big dopamine response becomes less exciting.*
Logically, these different types of coding neurons in the tegmentum
(as well as the accumbens) get projections from the frontal cortex—that’s
where all the expectancy/discrepancy calculations take place—“Okay, I
thought I was going to get 5.0 but got 4.9. How big of a bummer is
that?”
Additional cortical regions weigh in. In one study subjects were
shown an item to purchase, with the degree of accumbens activation
predicting how much a person would pay.89 Then they were told the
70