provoking stimuli and in expressing fear. Moreover, fear activates the
amygdala in humans, with more activation predicting more behavioral
signs of fear.
In one study subjects in a brain scanner played a Ms. Pac-Man–
from–hell video game where they were pursued in a maze by a dot; if
caught, they’d be shocked.11 When people were evading the dot, the
amygdala was silent. However, its activity increased as the dot
approached; the stronger the shocks, the farther away the dot would be
when first activating the amygdala, the stronger the activation, and the
larger the self-reported feeling of panic.
In another study subjects waited an unknown length of time to
receive a shock.12 This lack of predictability and control was so aversive
that many chose to receive a stronger shock immediately. And in the
others the period of anticipatory dread increasingly activated the
amygdala.
Thus the human amygdala preferentially responds to fear-evoking
stimuli, even stimuli so fleeting as to be below conscious detection.
Powerful support for an amygdaloid role in fear processing comes
from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In PTSD sufferers the
amygdala is overreactive to mildly fearful stimuli and is slow in calming
down after being activated.13 Moreover, the amygdala expands in size
with long-term PTSD. This role of stress in this expansion will be
covered in chapter 4.
The amygdala is also involved in the expression of anxiety.14 Take a
deck of cards—half are black, half are red; how much would you wager
that the top card is red? That’s about risk. Here’s a deck of cards—at
least one is black, at least one is red; how much would you wager that
the top card is red? That’s about ambiguity. The circumstances carry
identical probabilities, but people are made more anxious by the second
scenario and activate the amygdala more. The amygdala is particularly
sensitive to unsettling circumstances that are social. A high-ranking male
rhesus monkey is in a sexual consortship with a female; in one condition
the female is placed in another room, where the male can see her. In the
second she’s in the other room along with a rival of the male. No
surprise, that situation activates the amygdala. Is that about aggression or
anxiety? Seemingly the latter—the extent of activation did not correlate
with the amount of aggressive behaviors and vocalizations the male
40