All these findings suggest that the mood and behavioral shifts are
biologically based. What is a social construct is medicalizing and
pathologizing these shifts as “symptoms,” a “syndrome,” or “disorder.”
Thus, what is the underlying biology? A leading theory points to the
plunging levels of progesterone as menses approaches and thus the loss
of its anxiolytic and sedating effects. In this view, PMS arises from too
extreme of a decline. However, there’s not much actual support for this
idea.
Another theory, backed by some evidence, concerns the hormone
beta-endorphin, famed for being secreted during exercise and inducing a
gauzy, euphoric “runner’s high.” In this model PMS is about abnormally
low levels of beta-endorphin. There are plenty more theories but very
little certainty.
Now for the question of how much PMS is associated with
aggression. In the 1960s, studies by Katharina Dalton, who coined the
term “premenstrual syndrome” in 1953, reported that female criminals
committed their crimes disproportionately during their perimenstrual
period (which may tell less about committing a crime than about getting
caught).65 Other studies of a boarding school showed a disproportionate
share of “bad marks” for behavioral offenses going to perimenstrual
students. However, the prison studies didn’t distinguish between violent
and nonviolent crimes, and the school study didn’t distinguish between
aggressive acts and infractions like tardiness. Collectively, there is little
evidence that women tend toward aggression around their menses or that
violent women are more likely to have committed their acts around their
menses.
Nevertheless, defense pleas of PMS-related “diminished
responsibility” have been successful in courtrooms.66 A notable 1980
case concerned Sandie Craddock, who murdered a coworker and had a
long rap sheet with more than thirty convictions for theft, arson, and
assault. Incongruously but fortuitously, Craddock was a meticulous
diarist, having years of records of not just when she was having her
period but also when she was out about town on a criminal spree. Her
criminal acts and times of menses matched so closely that she was put on
probation plus progesterone treatment. And making the case stranger,
Craddock’s doctor later reduced her progesterone dose; by her next
period, she had been arrested for attempting to knife someone. Probation
again, plus a wee bit more progesterone.
120