heart rate and blood pressure increase, delivering that circulating energy
to exercising muscles faster. Moreover, during stress, long-term building
projects—growth, tissue repair, and reproduction—are postponed until
after the crisis; after all, if a lion is chasing you, you have better things to
do with your energy than, say, thicken your uterine walls. Beta-
endorphin is secreted, the immune system is stimulated, and blood
clotting is enhanced, all useful following painful injury. Moreover,
glucocorticoids reach the brain, rapidly enhancing aspects of cognition
and sensory acuity.
This is wonderfully adaptive for the zebra or lion; try sprinting
without epinephrine and glucocorticoids, and you’ll soon be dead.
Reflecting its importance, this basic stress response is ancient
physiology, found in mammals, birds, fish, and reptiles.
What is not ancient is how stress works in smart, socially
sophisticated, recently evolved primates. For primates the definition of a
stressor expands beyond merely a physical challenge to homeostasis. In
addition, it includes thinking you’re going to be thrown out of
homeostasis. An anticipatory stress response is adaptive if there really is
a physical challenge coming. However, if you’re constantly but
incorrectly convinced that you’re about to be thrown out of balance,
you’re being an anxious, neurotic, paranoid, or hostile primate who is
psychologically stressed. And the stress response did not evolve for
dealing with this recent mammalian innovation.
Mobilizing energy while sprinting for your life helps save you. Do
the same thing chronically because of a stressful thirty-year mortgage,
and you’re at risk for various metabolic problems, including adult-onset
diabetes. Likewise with blood pressure: increase it to sprint across the
savanna—good thing. Increase it because of chronic psychological
stress, and you’ve got stress-induced hypertension. Chronically impair
growth and tissue repair, and you’ll pay the price. Ditto for chronically
inhibiting reproductive physiology; you’ll disrupt ovulatory cycles in
women and cause plummeting erections and testosterone levels in men.
Finally, while the acute stress response involves enhanced immunity,
chronic stress suppresses immunity, increasing vulnerability to some
infectious diseases.*
We have a dichotomy—if you’re stressed like a normal mammal in
an acute physical crisis, the stress response is lifesaving. But if instead
you chronically activate the stress response for reasons of psychological
123