independent respond most to apologies accompanied by offers of
compensation. There is also the issue of who is apologizing. What does it
mean that in 1993 Bill Clinton apologized to Japanese Americans for
their World War II internment? While the apology was laudable, and
accompanied by reparative money, could Clinton speak for FDR?37
The issue of reparations is immensely complicated. At one extreme,
reparations can be the ultimate proof of sincerity. This is at the heart of
the slavery reparations movement—so much of America’s growth into
economic privilege was built on slavery, and so many of the subsequent
benefits of the successful economy have been systematically denied to
African Americans, that there should be reparations to the descendants of
slaves. At the other extreme, reparations meant to purchase forgiveness
offend—this was the reasoning behind the newly born state of Israel’s
refusal of reparations from Germany, unless it was accompanied by
adequate remorse.
At the end of these steps might arise one of the strangest things
humans do—we forgive.38 For starters, forgiving is not forgetting. If
nothing else, that’s neurobiologically unlikely. A rat learns to associate a
bell with a shock and freezes when it hears it. When the next day the bell
repeatedly sounds without being accompanied by a shock, causing the
freezing behavior to “extinguish,” the memory trace of that learning does
not evaporate. Instead it is overlaid with newer learning—“Today the
bell is not bad news.” As proof, suppose that the day after that, the bell
again signals shock. If the initial learning of “bell = shock” had been
erased, it would take as long this day to learn the association as it did the
first. Instead there is rapid reacquisition: “bell = shock again.” Forgiving
someone doesn’t mean you’ve forgotten what he did.
There is a subset of victims who claim to have forgiven the
perpetrator, to have relinquished their anger and desire for punishment. I
include the word “claim” not to imply skepticism but to indicate that
forgiveness is a self-reported state that can be claimed but not proven.
Forgiveness can occur as a religious imperative. In the June 2015
Charleston church massacre, white supremacist Dylann Roof killed nine
parishioners at the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church. Two
days later, at Roof’s arraignment, stunningly, family members of the
dead were there to forgive him and pray for his soul.39
Forgiveness can take extraordinary cognitive reappraisal. Consider
the case of Jennifer Thompson-Cannino and Ronald Cotton.40 In 1984
640