The mysterious history before history, the blank slate of
knowledge about ourselves before Jericho, has licensed our
collective imagination and authorized the creation of primitive
Edens for some, forgotten matriarchies for others. It is good to
dream, but a sober, waking rationality suggests that if we start
with ancestors like chimpanzees and end up with modern humans
building walls and fighting platforms, the 5-million-year-long
trail to our modern selves was lined, along its full stretch, by a
male aggression that structured our ancestors’ social lives and
technology and minds.
It’s Hobbes all the way down, plus Keeley-esque contempt for
pacification-of-the-past dreamers.
This view has been strongly criticized: (a) We’re neither chimps nor
their descendants; they’ve been evolving at nearly the same pace as
humans since our ancestral split. (b) Wrangham picks and chooses in his
cross-species linkages; for example, he argues that the human
evolutionary legacy of violence is rooted not only in our close
relationship to chimps but also in our nearly-as-close kinship with
gorillas, who practice competitive infanticide. The problem is that,
overall, gorillas display minimal aggression, something Wrangham
ignores in linking human violence to gorillas. (c) As the most significant
species cherry-picking, Wrangham pretty much ignores bonobos, with
their far lower levels of violence than chimps, female social dominance,
and absence of hostile territoriality. Crucially, humans share as much of
their genes with bonobos as with chimps, something unknown when
Demonic Males was published (and, notably, Wrangham has since
softened his views).
For most in the field, most insights into the behavior of our HG
ancestors come from study of contemporary HGs.
Once, the world of humans consisted of nothing but HGs; today the
remnants of that world are in the few remaining pockets of peoples who
live pure HG lives. These include the Hadza of northern Tanzania, Mbuti
“Pygmies” in the Congo, Batwa in Rwanda, Gunwinggu of the
Australian outback, Andaman Islanders in India, Batak in the
Philippines, Semang in Malaysia, and various Inuit cultures in northern
Canada.
317