As noted, the most important thing about our membership in multiple
Us/Thems is the ease with which their prioritizing shifts. A famed
example, discussed in chapter 3, concerned math performance in Asian
American women, built around the stereotypes of Asians being good at
math, and women not. Half the subjects were primed to think of
themselves as Asian before a math test; their scores improved. Half were
primed about gender; scores declined. Moreover, levels of activity in
cortical regions involved in math skills changed in parallel.*46
We also recognize that other individuals belong to multiple
categories, and shift which we consider most relevant. Not surprisingly,
lots of that literature concerns race, with the core question being whether
it is an Us/Them that trumps all others.
The primacy of race has a lot of folk-intuition appeal. First, race is a
biological attribute, a conspicuous fixed identity that readily prompts
essentialist thinking.47 This also fuels intuitions about evolution—
humans evolved under conditions where different skin color is the
clearest signal that someone is a distant Them. And the salience of race
is seen cross-culturally—an astonishing percentage of cultures have
historically made status distinctions by skin color, including in
traditional cultures before Western contact, where with few exceptions
(e.g., the low-status Ainu ethnic minority in Japan) lighter skin tone
confers higher status both within and between groups.
But these intuitions are flimsy. First, while there are obvious
biological contributions to racial differences, “race” is a biological
continuum rather than a discrete category—for example, unless you
cherry-pick the data, genetic variation within race is generally as great as
between races. And this really is no surprise when looking at the range of
variation with a racial rubric—compare Sicilians with Swedes or a
Senegalese farmer with an Ethiopian herder.*
The evolutionary argument doesn’t hold up either. Racial differences,
which have only relatively recently emerged, are of little Us/Them
significance. For the hunter-gatherers of our hominin history, the most
different person you’d ever encounter in your life came from perhaps a
couple of dozen miles away, while the nearest person of a different race
lived thousands of miles away—there is no evolutionary legacy of
humans encountering people of markedly different skin color.
Furthermore, the notion of race as a fixed, biologically based
classification system doesn’t work either. At various times in the history
409