OUR LIVES AS ANIMALS AND OUR
HUMAN VERSATILITY AT BEING
AGGRESSIVE
S
o we have a first intellectual challenge, which is to always think in
this interdisciplinary way. The second challenge is to make sense of
humans as apes, primates, mammals. Oh, that’s right, we’re a kind of
animal. And it will be a challenge to figure out when we’re just like
other animals and when we are utterly different.
Some of the time we are indeed just like any other animal. When
we’re scared, we secrete the same hormone as would some subordinate
fish getting hassled by a bully. The biology of pleasure involves the same
brain chemicals in us as in a capybara. Neurons from humans and brine
shrimp work the same way. House two female rats together, and over the
course of weeks they will synchronize their reproductive cycles so that
they wind up ovulating within a few hours of each other. Try the same
with two human females (as reported in some but not all studies), and
something similar occurs. It’s called the Wellesley effect, first shown
with roommates at all-women’s Wellesley College.8 And when it comes
to violence, we can be just like some other apes—we pummel, we
cudgel, we throw rocks, we kill with our bare hands.
So some of the time an intellectual challenge is to assimilate how
similar we can be to other species. In other cases the challenge is to
appreciate how, though human physiology resembles that of other
species, we use the physiology in novel ways. We activate the classical
physiology of vigilance while watching a scary movie. We activate a
stress response when thinking about mortality. We secrete hormones
related to nurturing and social bonding, but in response to an adorable
baby panda. And this certainly applies to aggression—we use the same
muscles as does a male chimp attacking a sexual competitor, but we use
them to harm someone because of their ideology.
Finally, sometimes the only way to understand our humanness is to
consider solely humans, because the things we do are unique. While a
few other species have regular nonreproductive sex, we’re the only ones
17