gastrointestinal, and psychiatric disorders) that show the
steepest SES/health gradients.
The SES/health gradient is ubiquitous. Regardless of gender, age, or
race. With or without universal health care. In societies that are
ethnically homogeneous and those rife with ethnic tensions. In societies
in which the central mythology is a capitalist credo of “Living well is the
best revenge” and those in which it is a socialist anthem of “From each
according to his ability, to each according to his need.” When humans
invented material inequality, they came up with a way of subjugating the
low ranking like nothing ever before seen in the primate world.
A Really Odd Thing That We Do Now and Then
Amid the unique features of human hierarchies, one of the most
distinctive and recent is this business of having leaders and choosing
who they are.
As discussed, outdated primatology confused high rank with
“leadership” in silly ways. An alpha male baboon is not a leader; he just
gets the best stuff. And while everyone follows a knowledgeable old
female when she chooses her foraging route in the morning, there is
every indication that she is “going” rather than “leading.”
But humans have leaders, anchored in the unique notion of the
common good. What counts as the common good, and the leader’s role
in fostering it, obviously varies, ranging from leading the horde in the
siege of a castle to leading a bird-watching walk.
Even more newfangled is humans choosing their leaders, whether
selecting a clan head by acclamation around the campfire, or a three-
year-long presidential campaign season topped with the bizarreness of
the Electoral College. How do we choose leaders?
A frequent conscious component of decision making is to vote for
experience or competence rather than for stances on specific issues. This
is so common that in one study faces judged to look more competent
won elections 68 percent of the time.26 People also make conscious
voting choices based on single, potentially irrelevant issues (e.g., voting
for assistant county dogcatcher based on the candidates’ stances on drone
warfare in Pakistan). And then there’s the facet of American decision
443