CONCLUSIONS
A
n analogy concerning health: Stress can be bad for you. We no
longer die of smallpox or the plague and instead die of stress-
related diseases of lifestyle, like heart disease or diabetes, where damage
slowly accumulates over time. It is understood how stress can cause or
worsen disease or make you more vulnerable to other risk factors. Much
of this is even understood on the molecular level. Stress can even cause
your immune system to abnormally target hair follicles, causing your
hair to turn gray.
All true. Yet stress researchers do not aim to eliminate, to “cure,” us
of stress. It can’t be done, and even if it could, we wouldn’t want that—
we love stress when it’s the right kind; we call it “stimulation.”
The analogy is obvious. From massive, breathtaking barbarity to
countless pinpricks of microaggression, Us versus Them has produced
oceans of pain. Yet our generic goal is not to “cure” us of Us/Them
dichotomizing. It can’t be done, unless your amygdala is destroyed, in
which case everyone seems like an Us. But even if we could, we
wouldn’t want to eliminate Us/Them-ing.
I’m a fairly solitary person—after all, I’ve spent a significant amount
of my life studying a different species from my own, living alone in a
tent in Africa. Yet some of the most exquisitely happy moments of my
life have come from feeling like an Us, feeling accepted and not alone,
safe and understood, feeling part of something enveloping and larger
than myself, filled with a sense of being on the right side and doing both
well and good. There are even Us/Thems that I—eggheady, meek, and
amorphously pacifistic—would be willing to kill or die for.77
If we accept that there will always be sides, it’s a nontrivial to-do list
item to always be on the side of angels. Distrust essentialism. Keep in
mind that what seems like rationality is often just rationalization, playing
catch-up with subterranean forces that we never suspect. Focus on the
larger, shared goals. Practice perspective taking. Individuate, individuate,
individuate. Recall the historical lessons of how often the truly malignant
Thems keep themselves hidden and make third parties the fall guy.
425