Similar issues of prestige, proximity, legitimacy, and stability
influence whether people conform to a group. Obviously, groups of Us-
es evoke more conformity than do groups of Thems. Consider the
invoking of Us in Konrad Lorenz’s attempt to justify becoming a Nazi:
“Practically all my friends and teachers did so, including my own father
who certainly was a kindly and humane man.”75
With groups, issues of numbers come into play—how many other
voices are urging you to join the cool kids? Recall how among chimps or
two-year-old humans, one individual doing something three times does
not evoke the conformity of three individuals doing the same act once
each. Echoing this, follow-up studies by Asch showed that conformity
first kicks in when there are at least three people unanimously
contradicting what the subject thinks, with maximum conformity first
evoked by around half a dozen contradictors. But this is the artificial
world of lab subjects judging the length of a line—in the real world the
conforming power of a lynch mob of six doesn’t approach that of a mob
of a thousand.76
WHAT IS BEING REQUIRED AND IN WHAT CONTEXT
Two issues stand out. The first is the persuasive power of the
incremental. “You were okay shocking the guy with 225 volts, but not
with 226? That’s illogical.” “Come on, we’re all boycotting their
businesses. Let’s shut them down; it’s not like anyone patronizes them.
Come on, we’ve shut down their businesses, let’s loot them; it’s not like
the stores are doing them any good.” We rarely have a rational
explanation for an intuitive sense that a line has been crossed on a
continuum. What incrementalism does is put the potential resister on the
defensive, making the savagery seem like an issue of rationality rather
than of morality. This represents an ironic inversion of our tendency to
think in categories, to irrationally inflate the importance of an arbitrary
boundary. The descent into savagery can be so incremental as to come
with nothing but arbitrary boundaries, and our descent becomes like the
proverbial frog cooked alive without noticing. When your conscience
finally rebels and draws a line in the sand, we know that it is likely to be
an arbitrary one, fueled by implicit subterranean forces—despite your
best attempts at pseudospeciation, this victim’s face reminds you of a
loved one’s; a smell just wafted by that took you back to childhood and
reminds you of how life once felt innocent; your anterior cingulate
469