invention of Judaic pastoralists. The result is a world of Hatfields and
McCoys, with their escalating vendettas. This helps explain why the
elevated murder rates in the American South are not due to urban
violence or things like robberies but are instead about affronts to honor
between people who know each other. And it helps explain why
Southern prosecutors and juries are typically more forgiving of such
crimes of affronted honor. And it also helps explain the command
apparently given by many Southern matriarchs to their sons marching off
to join the Confederate fight: come back a winner or come back in a
coffin. The shame of surrender is not an option.
SHAMED COLLECTIVISTS AND GUILTY INDIVIDUALISTS
We return to our contrast between collectivist and individualistic
cultures (in the studies, as a reminder, “collectivist” has mostly meant
East Asian societies, while “individualistic” equals Western Europeans
and North Americans). Implicit in the very nature of the contrast are
markedly different approaches to the morality of ends and means. By
definition, collectivist cultures are more comfortable than individualistic
ones with people being used as a means to a utilitarian end. Moreover,
moral imperatives in collectivist cultures tend to be about social roles
and duties to the group, whereas those in individualistic cultures are
typically about individual rights.
Collectivist and individualistic cultures also differ in how moral
behavior is enforced. As first emphasized by the anthropologist Ruth
Benedict in 1946, collectivist cultures enforce with shame, while
individualistic cultures use guilt. This is a doozy of a contrast, as
explored in two excellent books, Stanford psychiatrist Herant
Katchadourian’s Guilt: The Bite of Conscience and NYU environmental
scientist Jennifer Jacquet’s Is Shame Necessary?30
In the sense used by most in the field, including these authors, shame
is external judgment by the group, while guilt is internal judgment of
yourself. Shame requires an audience, is about honor. Guilt is for
cultures that treasure privacy and is about conscience. Shame is a
negative assessment of the entire individual, guilt that of an act, making
it possible to hate the sin but love the sinner. Effective shaming requires
a conformist, homogeneous population; effective guilt requires respect
for law. Feeling shame is about wanting to hide; feeling guilt is about
wanting to make amends. Shame is when everyone says, “You can no
501