This business about heterogeneous environments driving down
heritability scores is important only in considering some hypothetical
species that, say, lives in both tundra and desert, in various population
densities, in nomadic bands, sedentary farming communities, and urban
apartment buildings.
Oh, that’s right, humans. Of all species, heritability scores in humans
plummet the most when shifting from a controlled experimental setting
to considering the species’ full range of habitats. Just consider how much
the heritability score for wearing earrings, with its gender split, has
declined since 1958.
—
Now to consider an extremely important complication.
Gene/Environment Interactions
Back to our plant. Imagine a growth pattern in environment A of 1, 1,
and 1 for the three gene variants, while in environment B it’s 10, 10, and
10. When considering the combined data from both environments,
heritability is zero—variation is entirely explained by which
environment the plant grew in.
Now, instead, in environment A it’s 1, 2, and 3, while in environment
B it’s also 1, 2, and 3. Heritability is 100 percent, with all variability in
height explained by genetic variation.
Now say environment A is 1, 2, and 3, and environment B is 1.5, 2.5,
3.5. Heritability is somewhere between 0 percent and 100 percent.
Now for something different: Environment A: 1, 2, 3. Environment
B: 3, 2, 1. In this case even talking about a heritability score is
problematic, because different gene variants have diametrically opposite
effects in different environments. We have an example of a central
concept in genetics, a gene/environment interaction, where qualitative,
rather than just quantitative, effects of a gene differ by environment.
Here’s a rule of thumb for recognizing gene/environment interactions,
translated into English: You are studying the behavioral effects of a gene
in two environments. Someone asks, “What are the effects of the gene on
some behavior?” You answer, “It depends on the environment.” Then
they ask, “What are the effects of environment on this behavior?” And
245