and they grimace at its taste, having mirror neurons at the intersection of
observing that expression and experiencing it yourself will certainly
make more vivid your understanding that you should probably avoid that
food. This is an idea advocated by Gregory Hickok of the University of
California at Irvine, who, as we’ll see, is a hard-nosed critic of mirror
neuron flights of fancy.
This harks back to chapter 2 and Antonio Damasio’s influential
somatic marker hypothesis, the idea that when we are choosing among
difficult options, the frontal cortex runs as-if experiments, canvassing
your mind’s and body’s responses to doing X or Y—a thought
experiment combined with a (gut) feeling experiment. Mirror neurons,
with their putative attunement to how things worked out for observed
individuals, would certainly weigh into this process.
Thus mirror neurons might be useful for learning the meaning of a
movement, how to carry it out more effectively, and the consequences
for someone else who did it. Nonetheless, such neuronal activity is
neither necessary nor sufficient for observational learning, especially of
the most interesting, abstract human kinds.
Then there’s the next, more controversial realm, namely the idea that
mirror neurons help you understand what someone else is thinking. This
can range from understanding what behavior they are doing to
understanding why they are doing it to grasping their larger motivations,
all the way to peering into their souls with your mirror neurons. You can
see why this has spawned debates.
In this view mirror neurons aid Theory of Mind, mind reading, and
perspective taking, suggesting that part of how we understand someone
else’s world is by simulating (in our minds, in our PMC, in our mirror
neurons) their actions.35 This orients a mirror neuron’s world in a very
different way from the previous section, where mirroring is to improve
your own motor performance and the most pertinent neuroanatomy about
mirror neurons in the PMC is their talking to motor neurons that
command muscles. In contrast, mirror neurons being concerned with
understanding someone else’s actions should be talking to Theory of
Mind–related brain regions, for which there is evidence.
There was also the suggestion that mirror neuron–mediated
perspective taking is particularly concerned with social interactions.
Rizzolatti, for example, showed that mirror neuron activity was greater
when the observed individual was closer.36 But importantly, this isn’t
537