All subjects reported more subjective empathy and showed more
activation of Theory of Mind brain regions (i.e., the temporoparietal
junction) when observing in-group members, but the bias was
significantly greater among Korean subjects. In addition, subjects from
both individualist and collectivist cultures denigrate out-group members,
but only the former inflate assessments of their own group. In other
words, East Asians, unlike Americans, don’t have to puff up their own
group to view others as inferior.14
What is fascinating is the direction that some of these differences
take, as shown in approaches pioneered by one of the giants in this field,
Richard Nisbett of the University of Michigan. Westerners problem-
solve in a more linear fashion, with more reliance on linguistic rather
than spatial coding. When asked to explain the movement of a ball, East
Asians are more likely to invoke relational explanations built around the
interactions of the ball with its environment—friction—while Westerners
focus on intrinsic properties like weight and density. Westerners are more
accurate at estimating length in absolute terms (“How long is that line?”)
while East Asians are better with relational estimates (“How much
longer is this line than that?”). Or how’s this one: Consider a monkey, a
bear, and a banana. Which two go together? Westerners think
categorically and choose the monkey and bear—they’re both animals.
East Asians think relationally and link the monkey and banana—if
you’re thinking of a monkey, also think of food it will need.15
Remarkably, the cultural differences extend to sensory processing,
where Westerners process information in a more focused manner, East
Asians in a more holistic one.16 Show a picture of a person standing in
the middle of a complex scene; East Asians will be more accurate at
remembering the scene, the context, while Westerners remember the
person in the middle. Remarkably, this is even observed on the level of
eye tracking—typically Westerners’ eyes first look at a picture’s center,
while East Asians scan the overall scene. Moreover, force Westerners to
focus on the holistic context of a picture, or East Asians on the central
subject, and the frontal cortex works harder, activating more.
As covered in chapter 7, cultural values are first inculcated early in
life. So it’s no surprise that culture shapes our attitudes about success,
morality, happiness, love, and so on. But what is startling to me is how
these cultural differences also shape where your eyes focus on a picture
275