at his bosses (who mostly escaped justice by depicting him as a rogue
vigilante rather than the civil servant of apartheid that he was) while
emphasizing his command of his killers. He shattered her by tentatively
asking if he had killed any of her loved ones (he had not).
And Gobodo-Madikizela found herself deeply troubled by her
growing empathy for de Kock.
A defining moment came one day when de Kock was recounting
something that made him markedly distressed. Gobodo-Madikizela
reflexively reached out and—a taboo act—touched his finger between
the jail bars. The next morning her arm felt leaden, as if paralyzed by the
touch. She struggled with whether her granting him this contact was a
sign of her power or his (with him somehow manipulating her into the
act). When she next saw him, he compounded her storm of feelings by
thanking her and confessing that it was his trigger hand that she had
touched. No, this was not the start of an unlikely friendship, as violins
play in the background. But the automaticity, the empathy implicit in her
reaching out to him, shows that somehow, remarkably, the tenuous
elements of Us-ness she now shared with de Kock had dominated at that
moment.
Burning and Unburning Bridges
A phenomenon in many settings of conflict is burning cultural
bridges as a way to forge a new, powerful Us category. Consider the Mau
Mau rebellion in Kenya in the 1950s. The brunt of British colonialism in
Kenya had focused on one tribe, the Kikuyu, who had the bad luck of
living on precisely the rich farm land that the colonials appropriated;
Kikuyu suffering finally boiled over into the Mau Mau insurrection.*
The agricultural Kikuyu were not particularly bellicose (unlike, say,
the nearby pastoralist Maasai, who had been terrorizing the Kikuyu
forever), and inculcating new Mau Mau fighters required powerful
symbolic effort. Oath making had great cultural significance to Kikuyus,
and Mau Mau oath making notoriously involved horrendous violations
of Kikuyu norms and taboos, acts guaranteeing shunning at home. The
message was clear: “You have burned a bridge; your only Us is us.”
This strategy is often used in a horrifying realm of modern violence,
namely rebel groups transforming kidnapped children into soldiers.21
Sometimes this involves new recruits having to burn symbolic cultural
630