have a key behavioral biological question—why did the chicken cross
the road? And if you’re a psychoneuroendocrinologist, your answer
would be “Because circulating estrogen levels in that chicken worked in
a certain part of her brain to make her responsive to this male signaling,”
and if you’re a bioengineer, the answer would be “Because the long bone
in the leg of the chicken forms a fulcrum for her pelvis (or some such
thing), allowing her to move forward rapidly,” and if you’re an
evolutionary biologist, you’d say, “Because over the course of millions
of years, chickens that responded to such gestures at a time that they
were fertile left more copies of their genes, and thus this is now an innate
behavior in chickens,” and so on, thinking in categories, in differing
scientific disciplines of explanation.
The goal of this book is to avoid such categorical thinking. Putting
facts into nice cleanly demarcated buckets of explanation has its
advantages—for example, it can help you remember facts better. But it
can wreak havoc on your ability to think about those facts. This is
because the boundaries between different categories are often arbitrary,
but once some arbitrary boundary exists, we forget that it is arbitrary and
get way too impressed with its importance. For example, the visual
spectrum is a continuum of wavelengths from violet to red, and it is
arbitrary where boundaries are put for different color names (for
example, where we see a transition from “blue” to “green”); as proof of
this, different languages arbitrarily split up the visual spectrum at
different points in coming up with the words for different colors. Show
someone two roughly similar colors. If the color-name boundary in that
person’s language happens to fall between the two colors, the person will
overestimate the difference between the two. If the colors fall in the
same category, the opposite happens. In other words, when you think
categorically, you have trouble seeing how similar or different two things
are. If you pay lots of attention to where boundaries are, you pay less
attention to complete pictures.
Thus, the official intellectual goal of this book is to avoid using
categorical buckets when thinking about the biology of some of our most
complicated behaviors, even more complicated than chickens crossing
roads.
What’s the replacement?
A behavior has just occurred. Why did it happen? Your first category
of explanation is going to be a neurobiological one. What went on in that
12