expectation is asymmetrical—do some task that pays
two brownie points and today, unexpectedly, you get
three instead, and the ACC perks up and takes notice; do
the task and instead of two brownie points you only get
one, and the ACC activates like mad. In the words of
Kevin Ochsner of Columbia University and colleagues,
the ACC is an “all-purpose alarm that signals when
ongoing behavior has hit a snag.”14
Unexpected pain is at the intersection of those two roles of the ACC,
a sure sign that things are amiss with your schema about the world. Even
with anticipated pain, you monitor whether it turns out to be of the
quality and quantity expected. As noted, the ACC doesn’t concern itself
with pedestrian concerns about pain (is it my finger or my toe that
hurts?); that’s the purview of less refined, more ancient brain circuitry.
What the ACC cares about is the meaning of the pain. Good news or bad,
and of what nature? Thus the ACC’s perception of pain can be
manipulated. Poke your finger with a pin and the ACC activates, along
with those brain regions telling you which finger and what parameters of
pain. Make someone believe that the inert cream you just smeared on his
finger is a powerful painkiller, and when you poke his finger, the “it’s my
finger, not my toe” circuitry still activates. But the ACC falls for the
placebo effect and stays silent.
Obviously the ACC receives inputs from interoceptive and
exteroceptive outposts. Equally logically, it sends lots of projections into
the sensorimotor cortex, making you very aware of and focused on the
body part that hurts.
But the sophistication of the ACC, the reason it sits up there in the
frontal cortex, is apparent when considering another type of pain. Back
to chapter 6 and the Cyberball game where subjects in brain scanners
play catch with a virtual ball on a computer screen, tossing it back and
forth, and the other two players stop throwing the ball to you. You’re
being left out, and the ACC activates. Insofar as the ACC cares about the
meaning of pain, it’s just as concerned with the abstractions of social and
emotional pain—social exclusion, anxiety, disgust, embarrassment—as
with physical pain. Intriguingly, major depression is associated with
various abnormalities in the ACC.* And the ACC is also involved during
positive resonance—when their pleasure is your pleasure.15
529