practiced mothering have a better survival rate for their own kids). And
who is a frequent “allomother”? The female’s kid sister.13
An extension of allomothering is the cooperative breeding of New
World monkeys like marmosets. In their social groups only one female
breeds, while the others—typically younger relatives—help with child
care.14
The extent to which a male primate cares for infants reflects his
certainty of paternity.15 Among marmosets, who form stable pair-bonds,
males do most of the child care. In contrast, among baboons, where a
female mates with multiple males during her estrus cycle, it’s only the
likely fathers (i.e., males who mated on the female’s most fertile day,
when she had her most conspicuous estrus swelling) who invest in the
well-being of the child, aiding him in a fight.*
Among many primates, how often you groom someone depends on
how closely related they are to you. Among baboons, females spend their
whole life in their natal troop (whereas males migrate to a new troop at
puberty); as a result, adult females have complex cooperative kinship
relations and inherit their dominance rank from their mother. Among
chimps it’s the opposite; females leave home at puberty, and kin-based
adult cooperation occurs only among males (for example, where groups
of related males attack solitary males from neighboring groups). And
among langurs, when a female defends her infant against a new male,
she most often is helped by elderly female relatives.
Moreover, primates understand kinship. Dorothy Cheney and Robert
Seyfarth of the University of Pennsylvania, studying wild vervet
monkeys, have shown that if animal A is crummy to animal B,
afterward, B is more likely to be crummy to A’s relatives. And if A is
lousy to B, B’s relatives are more likely to be crummy to A.
Furthermore, if A is lousy to B, B’s relatives are more likely to be
crummy to A’s relatives.16
In beautiful “playback” experiments, Cheney and Seyfarth first
recorded vocalizations from each vervet in a group. They’d place a
speaker in some bushes, and when everyone was sitting around, they’d
play a recording of some kid giving a distress call. And the females
would all look at the kid’s mother—“Hey, that’s Madge’s kid. What’s she
going to do?” (Note that this also shows that monkeys recognize voices.)
In a study of wild baboons, Cheney and Seyfarth would wait for two
unrelated females to sit near the bush with the speaker and then play one
341