breeding male. Elsewhere are all-male groups that intermittently drive
out the resident male; after infighting, one male then drives out the rest.
Here’s his new domain, consisting of females with the babies of the
previous male. And crucially, the average tenure of a breeding male
(about twenty-seven months) is shorter than the average interbirth
interval. No females are ovulating, because they’re nursing infants; thus
this new stud will be booted out himself before any females wean their
kids and resume ovulating. All for nothing, none of his genes passed on.
What, logically, should he do? Kill the infants. This decreases the
reproductive success of the previous male and, thanks to the females
ceasing to nurse, they start ovulating.*
That’s the male perspective. What about the females? They’re also
into maximizing copies of genes passed on. They fight the new male,
protecting their infants. Females have also evolved the strategy of going
into “pseudoestrus”—falsely appearing to be in heat. They mate with the
male. And since males know squat about female langur biology, they fall
for it—“Hey, I mated with her this morning and now she’s got an infant;
I am one major stud.” They’ll often cease their infanticidal attacks.
Despite initial skepticism, competitive infanticide has been
documented in similar circumstances in 119 species, including lions,
hippos, and chimps.9
A variant occurs in hamsters; because males are nomadic, any infant
a male encounters is unlikely to be his, and thus he attempts to kill it
(remember that rule about never putting a pet male hamster in a cage
with babies?). Another version occurs among wild horses and gelada
baboons; a new male harasses pregnant females into miscarrying. Or
suppose you’re a pregnant mouse and a new, infanticidal male has
arrived. Once you give birth, your infants will be killed, wasting all the
energy of pregnancy. Logical response? Cut your losses with the “Bruce
effect,” where pregnant females miscarry if they smell a new male.10
Thus competitive infanticide occurs in numerous species (including
among female chimps, who sometimes kill infants of unrelated
females).11 None of this makes sense outside of gene-based individual
selection.
Individual selection is shown with heartbreaking clarity by mountain
gorillas, my favorite primate.12 They’re highly endangered, hanging on
in pockets of high-altitude rain forest on the borders of Uganda, Rwanda,
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. There are only about a
338