commune.
Which lasted only briefly before three ex-prisoners and
one ex-guard overthrew the utopians and instituted a
draconian regime; fascinatingly, those four had scored
highest on scales of authoritarianism before the study
began. As the new regime settled into repressive power,
the study was terminated.
Thus, rather than a replication of the SPE, this wound up being more
like a replication of the FRE and the RRE (i.e., the French Revolution
and the Russian Revolution): a hierarchical regime is overthrown by wet-
nosed idealists who know all the songs from Les Mis, who are then
devoured by Bolsheviks or Reign of Terror–ists. Importantly, the ruling
junta at the end having entered the study with the strongest
predispositions toward authoritarianism certainly suggests bad apples
rather than bad barrels.
Even bigger surprise—stop the presses—Zimbardo criticized the
study, arguing that its structure invalidated it as a chance to replicate the
SPE; that guard/prisoner assignments could not have really been random;
and that filming made this a TV spectacle rather than science; and
asking, how can this be a model for anything when the prisoners take
over the prison?73
Naturally, Reicher and Haslam disagreed with his disagreement,
pointing out that prisoners have de facto taken over some prisons, such
as the Maze in Northern Ireland, which the Brits filled with IRA political
prisoners, and the Robben Island prison, in which Nelson Mandela spent
his endless years.
Zimbardo called Reicher and Haslam “scientifically irresponsible”
and “fraudulent.” They pulled out all the stops by quoting Foucault:
“Where there is [coercive] power there is resistance.”
Let’s calm down. Amid the controversies over Milgram and the SPE,
two deeply vital things are indisputable:
When pressured to conform and obey, a far higher
percentage of perfectly normal people than most would
predict succumb and do awful things. Contemporary
work using a variant on the Milgram paradigm shows
“just following orders” in action, where the pattern of
467