building fortifications; or butchering every man, woman, and child in a
village is irrelevant to that question. That’s because all these study
subjects are pastoralists, agriculturalists, or horticulturalists, lifestyles
that emerged only in the last ten thousand to fourteen thousand years,
after the domestication of plants and animals. In the context of hominin
history stretching back hundreds of thousands of years, being a camel
herder or farmer is nearly as newfangled as being a lobbyist advocating
for legal rights for robots. For most of history, humans have been hunter-
gatherers, a whole different kettle of fish.
War and Hunter-Gatherers, Past and Present
Roughly 95 to 99 percent of hominin history has been spent in small,
nomadic bands that foraged for edible plants and hunted cooperatively.
What is known about hunter-gatherer (for sanity’s sake, henceforth HG)
violence?
Given that prehistoric HGs didn’t have lots of material possessions
that have lasted tens of thousands of years, they haven’t left much of an
archaeological record. Insight into their minds and lifestyle comes from
cave paintings dating back as much as forty thousand years. Though
paintings from around the world show humans hunting, hardly any
unambiguously depict interhuman violence.
The paleontological record is even sparser. To date, there has been
discovered one site of an HG massacre, dating back ten thousand years
in northern Kenya; this will be discussed later.
What to do with this void of information? One approach is
comparative, inferring the nature of our distant ancestors by comparing
them with extant nonhuman primates. Early versions of this approach
were the writings of Konrad Lorenz and of Robert Ardrey, who argued in
his 1966 best seller The Territorial Imperative that human origins are
rooted in violent territoriality.68 The most influential modern incarnation
comes from Richard Wrangham, particularly in his 1997 book (with Dale
Peterson) Demonic Males: Apes and the Origins of Human Violence. For
Wrangham chimps provide the clearest guide to the behavior of earliest
humans, and the picture is a bloody one. He essentially leapfrogs HGs
entirely: “So we come back to the Yanomamo. Do they suggest to us that
chimpanzee violence is linked to human war? Clearly they do.”
Wrangham summarizes his stance:
316