has suggested that one reason for Europe’s historical success, relative to
Africa, has been the weather—Western-style planning ahead arose from
the annual reality of winter coming.* Larger-scale changes in weather
are known to be consequential. In the tightness study, cultural tightness
was also predicted by a history of floods, droughts, and cyclones.
Another pertinent aspect of weather concerns the Southern Oscillation,
known as El Niño, the multiyear fluctuation of average water
temperatures in the equatorial Pacific Ocean. El Niños, occurring about
every dozen years, involve warmer, drier weather (with the opposite
during La Niña years) and are associated in many developing countries
with droughts and food shortages. Over the last fifty years El Niños have
roughly doubled the likelihood of civil conflict, mostly by stoking the
fires of preexisting conflicts.
The relationship between drought and violence is tricky. The civil
conflict referred to in the previous paragraph concerned deaths caused by
battle between governmental and nongovernmental forces (i.e., civil
wars or insurgencies). Thus, rather than fighting over a watering hole or
a field for grazing, this was fighting for modern perks of power. But in
traditional settings drought may mean spending more time foraging or
hauling water for your crops. Raiding to steal the other group’s women
isn’t a high priority, and why rustle someone else’s cows when you can’t
even feed your own? Conflict declines.
Interestingly, something similar occurs in baboons. Normally,
baboons in rich ecosystems like the Serengeti need forage only a few
hours a day. Part of what endears baboons to primatologists is that this
leaves them about nine hours daily to devote to social machinations—
trysting and jousting and backbiting. In 1984 there was a devastating
drought in East Africa. Among baboons, while there was still sufficient
food, it took every waking moment to get enough calories; aggression
decreased.52
So ecological duress can increase or decrease aggression. This raises
the key issue of what global warming will do to our best and worst
behaviors. There will definitely be some upsides. Some regions will have
longer growing seasons, increasing the food supply and reducing
tensions. Some people will eschew conflict, being preoccupied with
saving their homes from the encroaching ocean or growing pineapples in
the Arctic. But amid squabbling about the details in predictive models,
the consensus is that global warming won’t do good things to global
302