DEFINITIONS, SIMILARITIES, AND
DIFFERENCES
“C
ulture,” naturally, has been defined various ways. One
influential definition comes from Edward Tylor, a distinguished
nineteenth-century cultural anthropologist. For him culture is “that
complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, law,
custom, and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man [sic] as a
member of society.”4
This definition, obviously, is oriented toward something that is
specific to humans. Jane Goodall blew off everyone’s socks in the 1960s
by reporting the now-iconic fact that chimps make tools. Her study
subjects modified twigs by stripping off the leaves and pushing them into
termite mounds; termites would bite the twig, still holding on when it
was pulled out, yielding a snack for the chimps.
This was just the start. Chimps were subsequently found to use
various tools—wood or rock anvils for cracking open nuts, wads of
chewed leaves to sponge up hard-to-reach water, and, in a real shocker,
sharpened sticks for spearing bush babies.5 Different populations make
different tools; new techniques spread across social networks (among
chimps who hang with one another); kids learn the ropes by watching
their moms; techniques spread from one group to another when someone
emigrates; chimp nut-cracking tools in excess of four thousand years old
have been excavated. And in my favorite example, floating between tool
use and accessorizing, a female in Zambia got it into her head to go
around with a strawlike blade of grass in her ear. The action had no
obvious function; apparently she just liked having a piece of grass
sticking out of her ear. So sue her. She did it for years, and over that time
the practice spread throughout her group. A fashionista.
In the decades since Goodall’s discovery, tool use has been observed
in apes and monkeys, elephants, sea otters, mongoose.6 Dolphins use sea
sponges to dig up fish burrowed into the sea floor. Birds use tools for
nest building or food acquisition—jays and crows, for example, use
269