shapeless, self-serving, parochial moral intuition; have lined up enough
of their gray-bearded philosopher-king shepherds to proclaim the moral
force of their stance; feel in the most sincere, pained way that the very
essence of what they value and who they are is at stake, that the very
moral rightness of the universe is wobbling; all of that so strongly that
they can’t recognize the “right” for what it is, namely “I can’t tell you
why, but this is how things should be done.” To cite a quote attributed to
Oscar Wilde, “Morality is simply the attitude we adopt towards people
whom we personally dislike.”
It’s Us versus Them framed morally, and the importance of what
Greene calls “the Tragedy of Commonsense Morality” is shown by the
fact that most intergroup conflicts on our planet ultimately are cultural
disagreements about whose “right” is righter.
This is an intellectualized, bloodless way of framing the issue. Here’s
a different way.
Say I decide that it would be a good thing to have pictures here
demonstrating cultural relativism, displaying an act that is
commonsensical in one culture but deeply distressing in another. “I
know,” I think, “I’ll get some pictures of a Southeast Asian dog-meat
market; like me, most readers will likely resonate with dogs.” Good plan.
On to Google Images, and the result is that I spend hours transfixed,
unable to stop, torturing myself with picture after picture of dogs being
carted off to market, dogs being butchered, cooked, and sold, pictures of
humans going about their day’s work in a market, indifferent to a crate
stuffed to the top with suffering dogs.
I imagine the fear those dogs feel, how they are hot, thirsty, in pain. I
think, “What if these dogs had come to trust humans?” I think of their
fear and confusion. I think, “What if one of the dogs whom I’ve loved
had to experience that? What if this happened to a dog my children
loved?” And with my heart racing, I realize that I hate these people, hate
every last one of them and despise their culture.
And it takes a locomotive’s worth of effort for me to admit that I
can’t justify that hatred and contempt, that mine is a mere moral
intuition, that there are things that I do that would evoke the same
response in some distant person whose humanity and morality are
certainly no less than mine, and that but for the randomness of where I
happen to have been born, I could have readily had their views instead.
509