What happened to the tearful forgiveness scenarios? What about
perpetrators at least showing remorse for their actions? It was not
required, and few did. The goal was not to transform those individuals; it
was to increase the odds that the shattered nation would function. In
follow-up studies by the South African Centre for the Study of Violence
and Reconciliation, victim participants commonly felt “that the TRC had
been more successful at the national than the local level.” Many were
outraged that there were no apologies, no reparations, that many
perpetrators remained in their jobs. Interestingly, echoing chapter 15,
many were equally angry about symbolic changes that had not occurred
—not only is this killer still a cop, but there’s still a
holiday/monument/street name celebrating apartheid. A wide majority of
black (but not white) South Africans saw the TRC as fair and successful,
and it accompanied South Africa’s miraculously transitioning to
freedom, rather than descending into civil war. Thus TRCs show the
differences between reconciliation and the likes of remorse and
forgiveness.*35
As every parent knows, a transparently insincere apology
accomplishes little and can even worsen things. But deep remorse is
different. The New Yorker recounts the story of Lu Lobello, an American
Iraq War veteran who accidentally killed three members of a family,
collateral damage during a firefight; haunted by it, he spent nine years
tracking down the survivors to apologize. Or consider Hazel Bryan
Massery, the snarling white teenager at the center of the iconic 1957
civil-rights-movement photograph of Elizabeth Eckford attempting to
integrate Little Rock Central High School. A few years later Massery
contacted Eckford to apologize.36
Do apologies “work”? It depends. One issue is what the person is
apologizing for, ranging from the concrete (“I’m sorry I broke your toy”)
to the global and essentialist (“I’m sorry I’ve viewed your people as not
fully human”). Another is what the apologizer aims to do about their
remorse. And there’s the makeup of the recipient of the apology. Studies
show that (a) victims who are oriented toward the workings of a
collective system respond most to apologies that emphasize failure of
that system (“I’m sorry, we police are supposed to protect, not break
laws”); (b) victims most oriented to relationships respond most to
apologies that are empathic (“I’m sorry for the pain that I caused you, for
taking your son”); and (c) victims who are most autonomous and
639