what the actual ends will be, and true impartiality is damn hard with our
Us/Them minds. But in theory, at least, there is a solid, logical appeal to
utilitarianism.
Except that there’s a problem—unless someone is missing their
vmPFC, the appeal of utilitarianism inevitably comes to a screeching halt
at some point. For most people it’s pushing the person in front of the
trolley. Or smothering a crying baby to save a group of people hiding
from Nazis. Or killing a healthy person to harvest his organs and save
five lives. As Greene emphasizes, virtually everyone immediately grasps
the logic and appeal of utilitarianism yet eventually hits a point where it
is clear that it’s not a good guide for everyday moral decision making.
Greene and, independently, the neuroscientist John Allman of
Caltech and historian of science James Woodward of the University of
Pittsburgh have explored the neurobiological underpinnings of a key
point—the utilitarianism being considered here is unidimensional and
artificial; it hobbles the sophistication of both our moral intuitions and
our moral reasoning. A pretty convincing case can be made for utilitarian
consequentialism. As long as you consider the immediate consequences.
And the longer-term consequences. And the long-long-term
consequences. And then go and consider them all over again a few times.
When people hit a wall with utilitarianism, it’s because what is on
paper a palatable trade-off in the short run (“Intentionally kill one to save
five—that obviously increases collective happiness”) turns out not to be
so in the long run. “Sure, that healthy person’s involuntary organ
donation just saved five lives, but who else is going to get dissected that
way? What if they come for me? I kinda like my liver. What else might
they start doing?” Slippery slopes, desensitization, unintended
consequences, intended consequences. When shortsighted utilitarianism
(what Woodward and Allman call “parametric” consequentialism) is
replaced with a longer-viewed version (what they call “strategic”
consequentialism and what Greene calls “pragmatic utilitarianism”), you
get better outcomes.
Our overview of moral intuition versus moral reasoning has
generated a dichotomy, something akin to how guys can’t have lots of
blood flow to their crotch and their brain at the same time; they have to
choose. Similarly, you have to choose whether your moral decision
making will be about the amygdala or the dlPFC. But this is a false
dichotomy, because we reach our best long-term, strategic,
506