These indigenous groups are not stand-ins for our
prehistoric past. For one thing, many have obtained
weapons more lethal than those of prehistory (a damning
criticism of Chagnon is that he often traded axes,
machetes, and shotguns to Yanomamö for their
cooperation in his studies). For another, these groups
often live in degraded habitats that increase resource
competition, thanks to being increasingly hemmed in by
the outside world. And outside contact can be
catastrophic. Pinker cites research showing high rates of
violence among the Amazonian Aché and Hiwi tribes.
However, in examining the original reports, Fry found
that all of the Aché and Hiwi deaths were due to killings
by frontier ranchers intent on forcing them off their
land.66 This tells nothing about our prehistoric past.
Both sides in these debates see much at stake. Near the end of his
book, Keeley airs a pretty weird worry: “The doctrines of the pacified
past unequivocally imply that the only answer to the ‘mighty scourge of
war’ is a return to tribal conditions and the destruction of all
civilization.” In other words, unless this tomfoolery of archaeologists
pacifying the past stops, people will throw away their antibiotics and
microwaves, do some scarification rituals, and switch to loincloths—and
where will that leave us?
Critics on the other side of these debates have deeper worries. For
one thing, the false picture of, say, Amazonian tribes as ceaselessly
violent has been used to justify stealing their land. According to Stephen
Corry of Survival International, a human-rights organization that
advocates for indigenous tribal peoples, “Pinker is promoting a fictitious,
colonialist image of a backward ‘Brutal Savage’, which pushes the
debate back over a century and is still used to destroy tribes.”67
—
Amid these roiling debates, let’s keep sight of what got us to this point.
A behavior has occurred that is good, bad, or ambiguous. How have
cultural factors stretching back to the origins of humans contributed to
that behavior? And rustling cattle on a moonless night; or setting aside
tending your cassava garden to raid your Amazonian neighbors; or
315