The role of disgust in Them-ing explains some individual differences
in its magnitude. Specifically, people with the strongest negative
attitudes toward immigrants, foreigners, and socially deviant groups tend
to have low thresholds for interpersonal disgust (e.g., are resistant to
wearing a stranger’s clothes or sitting in a warm seat just vacated).27 We
will return to this finding in chapter 15.
Some Thems are ridiculous, i.e., subject to ridicule and mockery,
humor as hostility.28 Out-groups mocking the in-group is a weapon of
the weak, damaging the mighty and lessening the sting of subordination.
When an in-group mocks an out-group, it’s to solidify negative
stereotypes and reify the hierarchy. In line with this, individuals with a
high “social dominance orientation” (acceptance of hierarchy and group
inequality) are most likely to enjoy jokes about out-groups.
Thems are also frequently viewed as simpler and more homogeneous
than Us, with simpler emotions and less sensitivity to pain. David
Berreby, in his superb book Us and Them: The Science of Identity, gives
a striking example, namely that whether it was ancient Rome, medieval
England, imperial China, or the antebellum South, the elite had the
system-justifying stereotype of slaves as simple, childlike, and incapable
of independence.29
Essentialism is all about viewing Them as homogeneous and
interchangeable, the idea that while we are individuals, they have a
monolithic, immutable, icky essence. A long history of bad relations
with Thems fuels essentialist thinking—“They’ve always been like this
and always will be.” As does having few personal interactions with
Thems—after all, the more interactions with Thems, the more exceptions
accumulate that challenge essentialist stereotyping. But infrequency of
interactions is not required, as evidenced by essentialist thinking about
the opposite sex.30
Thus, Thems come in different flavors—threatening and angry,
disgusting and repellent, primitive and undifferentiated.
Thoughts Versus Feelings About Them
How much are our thoughts about Them post-hoc rationalizations for
our feelings about Them? Back to interactions between cognition and
affect.
402