ancestors. Nonetheless, these pure HGs are no tie-dyed pacifists; 86
percent of the cultures experienced lethal violence. What are their
causes?
In his 2012 book Moral Origins: The Evolution of Virtue, Altruism,
and Shame, Boehm also surveys the literature, using slightly less
stringent criteria than Fry uses, producing a list of about fifty relatively
“pure” nomadic HG cultures (heavily skewed toward Inuit groups from
the Arctic).75 As expected, violence is mostly committed by men. Most
common is killing related to women—two men fighting over a particular
woman, or attempts to kidnap a woman from a neighboring group.
Naturally, there are men killing their wives, usually over accusations of
adultery. There’s female infanticide and killing arising from accusations
of witchcraft. There are occasional killings over garden-variety stealing
of food or refusals to share food. And lots of revenge killings by relatives
of someone killed.
Both Fry and Boehm report killings akin to capital punishment for
severe norm violations. What norms do nomadic HGs value most?
Fairness, indirect reciprocity, and avoidance of despotism.
Fairness. As noted, HGs pioneered human cooperative hunting and
sharing among nonrelatives.76 This is most striking with meat. It’s
typically shared by successful hunters with unsuccessful ones (and their
families); individuals playing dominant roles in hunts don’t necessarily
get much more meat than everyone else; crucially, the most successful
hunter rarely decides how the meat is divided—instead this is typically
done by a third party. There are fascinating hints about the antiquity of
this. Big-game hunting by hominins 400,000 years ago has been
documented; bones from animals butchered then show cut marks that are
chaotic, overlapping at different angles, suggesting a free-for-all. But by
200,000 years ago the contemporary HG pattern is there—cut marks are
evenly spaced and parallel, suggesting that single individuals butchered
and dispensed the meat.
This does not mean, though, that sharing is effortless for pure HGs.
Boehm notes how, for example, the !Kung perpetually kvetch about
being shortchanged on meat. It’s the background hum of social
regulation.
Indirect reciprocity. The next chapter discusses reciprocal altruism
between pairs of individuals. Boehm emphasizes how nomadic HGs
specialize, instead, in indirect reciprocity. Person A is altruistic to B; B’s
324