trolley” problem, where a trolley is bearing down on five people and you
must decide if it’s okay to kill one person to save the five. Framing of the
problem is key. In one version you pull a lever, diverting the trolley onto
a side track. This saves the five, but the trolley kills someone who
happened to be on this other track; 70 to 90 percent of people say they
would do this. In the second scenario you push the person in front of the
trolley with your own hands. This stops the trolley, but the person is
killed; 70 to 90 percent say no way. The same numerical trade-off, but
utterly different decisions.
Greene and Cohen gave subjects the two versions while
neuroimaging them. Contemplating intentionally killing someone with
your own hands activates the decider dlPFC, along with emotion-related
regions that respond to aversive stimuli (including a cortical region
activated by emotionally laden words), the amygdala, and the vmPFC.
The more amygdaloid activation and the more negative emotions the
participant reported in deciding, the less likely they were to push.
And when people contemplate detachedly pulling a lever that
inadvertently kills someone? The dlPFC alone activates. As purely
cerebral a decision as choosing which wrench to use to fix a widget. A
great study.*
Other studies have examined interactions between “cognitive” and
“emotional” parts of the brain. A few examples:
Chapter 3 discusses some unsettling research—stick your
average person in a brain scanner, and show him a picture of
someone of another race for only a tenth of a second. This is too
fast for him to be aware of what he saw. But thanks to that
anatomical shortcut, the amygdala knows . . . and activates. In
contrast, show the picture for a longer time. Again the amygdala
activates, but then the cognitive dlPFC does as well, inhibiting
the amygdala—the effort to control what is for most people an
unpalatable initial response.
Chapter 6 discusses experiments where a subject plays a game
with two other people and is manipulated into feeling that she is
being left out. This activates her amygdala, periaqueductal gray
(that ancient brain region that helps process physical pain),
anterior cingulate, and insula, an anatomical picture of anger,
61