And what does amygdala damage do to aggressive behavior? This
was studied in humans where amygdalotomies were done not to control
seizures but to control aggression. Such psychosurgery provoked fiery
controversy in the 1970s. And I don’t mean scientists not saying hello to
each other at conferences. I mean a major public shit storm.
The issue raised bioethical lightning rods: What counted as
pathological aggression? Who decided? What other interventions had
been tried unsuccessfully? Were some types of hyperaggressive
individuals more likely to go under the knife than others? What
constituted a cure?6
Most of these cases concerned rare epileptics where seizure onset
was associated with uncontrollable aggression, and where the goal was
to contain that behavior (these papers had titles such as “Clinical and
physiological effects of stereotaxic bilateral amygdalotomy for
intractable aggression”). The fecal hurricane concerned the involuntary
lopping out of the amygdala in people without epilepsy but with a history
of severe aggression. Well, doing this could be profoundly helpful. Or
Orwellian. This is a long, dark story and I will save it for another time.
Did destruction of the human amygdala lessen aggression? Pretty
clearly so, when violence was a reflexive, inchoate outburst preceding a
seizure. But with surgery done solely to control behavior, the answer is,
er, maybe—the heterogeneity of patients and surgical approaches, the
lack of modern neuroimaging to pinpoint exactly which parts of the
amygdala were destroyed in each individual, and the imprecision in the
behavioral data (with papers reporting from 33 to 100 percent “success”
rates) make things inconclusive. The procedure has almost entirely fallen
out of practice.
The amygdala/aggression link pops up in two notorious cases of
violence. The first concerns Ulrike Meinhof, a founder in 1968 of the
Red Army Faction (aka the Baader-Meinhof Gang), a terrorist group
responsible for bombings and bank robberies in West Germany. Meinhof
had a conventional earlier life as a journalist before becoming violently
radicalized. During her 1976 murder trial, she was found hanged in her
jail cell (suicide or murder? still unclear). In 1962 Meinhof had had a
benign brain tumor surgically removed; the 1976 autopsy showed that
remnants of the tumor and surgical scar tissue impinged on her
amygdala.7
38