THE NUTS AND BOLTS OF FRONTAL
CORTICAL MATURATION
T
he delayed maturation of the frontal cortex suggests an obvious
scenario, namely that early in adolescence the frontal cortex has
fewer neurons, dendritic branches, and synapses than in adulthood, and
that levels increase into the midtwenties. Instead, levels decrease.
This occurs because of a truly clever thing evolved by mammalian
brains. Remarkably, the fetal brain generates far more neurons than are
found in the adult. Why? During late fetal development, there is a
dramatic competition in much of the brain, with winning neurons being
the ones that migrate to the correct location and maximize synaptic
connections to other neurons. And neurons that don’t make the grade?
They undergo “programmed cell death”—genes are activated that cause
them to shrivel and die, their materials then recycled. Neuronal
overproduction followed by competitive pruning (which has been termed
“neural Darwinism”) allowed the evolution of more optimized neural
circuitry, a case of less being more.
The same occurs in the adolescent frontal cortex. By the start of
adolescence, there’s a greater volume of gray matter (an indirect measure
of the total number of neurons and dendritic branches) and more
synapses than in adults; over the next decade, gray-matter thickness
declines as less optimal dendritic processes and connections are pruned
away.*3 Within the frontal cortex, the evolutionarily oldest subregions
mature first; the spanking-new (cognitive) dorsolateral PFC doesn’t even
start losing gray-matter volume until late adolescence. The importance of
this developmental pattern was shown in a landmark study in which
children were neuroimaged and IQ tested repeatedly into adulthood. The
longer the period of packing on gray-matter cortical thickness in early
adolescence before the pruning started, the higher the adult IQ.
Thus, frontal cortical maturation during adolescence is about a more
efficient brain, not more brain. This is shown in easily misinterpreted
neuroimaging studies comparing adolescents and adults.4 A frequent
theme is how adults have more executive control over behavior during
154