the savagery he had done. You can practically see chapter 5’s neural
plasticity on fire in Newton’s brain.
Nothing resembling this occurred.
Newton, the son of a ship captain, goes to sea with his father at age
eleven. At eighteen he is pressed into service in the navy, tries to desert,
and is flogged. Newton manages to escape and works on a West African
slave ship. Get ready for him to see the similarity between the captivity
of these people and his own experience, to have a revelation.
No such thing occurs.
He works on the slave ship and is apparently so detested by everyone
that they dump him in what is now Sierra Leone with a slaver who gives
him to his wife as a slave. He’s rescued; the ship he is on, returning to
England, is caught in a horrific storm and starts to sink. Newton calls out
to God, the ship doesn’t sink, and he has a spiritual conversion to
evangelical Christianity. He signs up to work on another slave ship. Get
ready now—he’s found God, has just been a slave himself, and is poised
to suddenly recognize the horror that was the slave trade.
Nope.
He professes some sympathy for slaves, grows deeper into his
evangelical conversion. He eventually becomes captain of a slave ship
and works another six years before stopping. At last he’s seen his actions
for what they are.
Not that either.
It’s because his health was declining from those tough voyages. He
works as a tax collector, studies theology, applies to become an Anglican
priest. And he invests his money in slave-trading ventures. In the
parlance of my native Brooklyn, from when it was not yet trendy, can
you believe this fuggin’ guy?
He becomes a popular preacher, known for his sermons and pastoral
concern; he composes hymns, speaks out for the poor and downtrodden.
Presumably, somewhere along the way he stops investing in slavery;
maybe because of his conscience, maybe because better investments
come along. Still, not a word about slavery. Finally he publishes a
pamphlet denouncing it, thirty-four years after stopping being a slaver.
That’s a lot of time spent as a blind wretch. Newton’s is a rare voice
among abolitionists, someone who has witnessed those horrors, let alone
inflicted them. He becomes the major abolitionist voice in England and
lives to see England ban the slave trade in 1807.
659