The grandparent of the trio was Asch, working in the early 1950s at
Swarthmore College.62 The format of his studies was simple. A
volunteer, thinking that this was a study of perception, would be given a
pair of cards. One card would have a line on it, the other a trio of
different-length lines, one of which matched the length of the singleton
line. Which line of the trio is the same length as the singleton? Easy;
volunteers sitting alone in a room had about a 1 percent error rate over a
series of cases.
Meanwhile, the volunteers in the experimental group take the test in
a room with seven others, each saying his choice out loud. Unbeknownst
to the volunteer, the other seven worked on the project. The volunteer
would “just happen” to go last, and the first seven would unanimously
pick a glaringly wrong answer. Stunningly, volunteers would now agree
with that incorrect answer about a third of the time, something replicated
frequently in the cottage industry of research spawned by Asch. Whether
due to the person’s actually changing their mind or their merely deciding
to go along, this was a startling demonstration of conformity.
—
On to the Milgram obedience experiment, whose first incarnations
appeared in the early 1960s at Yale.63 A pair of volunteers would show
up for a psychology “study of memory”; one would arbitrarily be
designated the “teacher,” the other the “learner.” Learner and teacher
would be in separate rooms, hearing but not seeing each other. In the
room with the teacher would be the lab-coated scientist supervising the
study.
The teacher would recite pairs of words (from a list given by the
scientist); the learner was supposed to remember their pairing. After a
series of these, the teacher would test the learner’s memory of the
pairings. Each time the learner made a mistake, the teacher was supposed
to shock them; with each mistake, shock intensity increased, up to a life-
threatening 450 volts, ending the session.
Teachers thought the shocks were real—at the start they’d been given
a real shock, supposedly of the intensity of the first punitive one. It hurt.
In reality no punitive shocks were given—the “learner” worked on the
project. As the intensity of the supposed shocks increased, the teacher
would hear the learner responding in pain, crying out, begging for the
teacher to stop.* (In one variant the “volunteer” who became the learner
461