Back to the rhinencephalon/limbic system war and the resolution
ethologists already knew: for a rodent, emotion is typically triggered by
olfaction. Across species the dominant sensory modality—vision,
sounds, whichever—has the most direct access to the limbic system.
Under the Radar: Subliminal and Unconscious
Cuing
It’s easy to see how the sight of a knife, the sound of a voice calling
your name, a touch on your hand can rapidly alter your brain.5 But
crucially, tons of subliminal sensory triggers occur—so fleeting or
minimal that we don’t consciously note them, or of a type that, even if
noted, seems irrelevant to a subsequent behavior.
Subliminal cuing and unconscious priming influence numerous
behaviors unrelated to this book. People think potato chips taste better
when hearing crunching sounds. We like a neutral stimulus more if, just
before seeing it, a picture of a smiling face is flashed for a twentieth of a
second. The more expensive a supposed (placebo) painkiller, the more
effective people report the placebo to be. Ask subjects their favorite
detergent; if they’ve just read a paragraph containing the word “ocean,”
they’re more likely to choose Tide—and then explain its cleaning
virtues.6
Thus, over the course of seconds sensory cues can shape your
behavior unconsciously.
A hugely unsettling sensory cue concerns race.7 Our brains are
incredibly attuned to skin color. Flash a face for less than a tenth of a
second (one hundred milliseconds), so short a time that people aren’t
even sure they’ve seen something. Have them guess the race of the
pictured face, and there’s a better-than-even chance of accuracy. We may
claim to judge someone by the content of their character rather than by
the color of their skin. But our brains sure as hell note the color, real fast.
By one hundred milliseconds, brain function already differs in two
depressing ways, depending on the race of the face (as shown with
neuroimaging). First, in a widely replicated finding, the amygdala
activates. Moreover, the more racist someone is in an implicit test of race
bias (stay tuned), the more activation there is.8
85