gene related to oxytocin signaling* are associated with differing degrees
of activation of the fusiform face area when looking at faces.
Findings like these suggest that abnormalities in these neuropeptides
increase the risk of disorders of impaired sociality, namely autism
spectrum disorders (ASD) (strikingly, people with ASD show blunted
fusiform responses to faces).37 Remarkably, ASD has been linked to
gene variants related to oxytocin and vasopressin, to nongenetic
mechanisms for silencing the oxytocin receptor gene, and to lower levels
of the receptor itself. Moreover, the neuropeptides improve social skills
in some individuals with ASD—e.g., enhancing eye contact.
Thus, sometimes oxytocin and vasopressin make us more prosocial,
but sometimes they make us more avid and accurate social information
gatherers. Nonetheless, there is a happy-face bias, since accuracy is most
enhanced for positive emotions.38
Time for more complications.
Contingent Effects of Oxytocin and Vasopressin
Recall testosterone’s contingent effects (e.g., making a monkey more
aggressive, but only toward individuals he already dominates). Naturally,
these neuropeptides’ effects are also contingent.39
One factor already mentioned is gender: oxytocin enhances different
aspects of social competence in women and men. Moreover, oxytocin’s
calming effects on the amygdala are more consistent in men than in
women. Predictably, neurons that make these neuropeptides are regulated
by both estrogen and testosterone.40
As a really interesting contingent effect, oxytocin enhances
charitability—but only in people who are already so. This mirrors
testosterone’s only raising aggression in aggression-prone people.
Hormones rarely act outside the context of the individual and his or her
environment.41
Finally, a fascinating study shows cultural contingencies in
oxytocin’s actions.42 During stress, Americans seek emotional support
(e.g., telling a friend about their problem) more readily than do East
Asians. In one study oxytocin receptor gene variants were identified in
American and Korean subjects. Under unstressful circumstances, neither
cultural background nor receptor variant affected support-seeking
112