outcompeting American car and steel manufacturers. Whoa. A sense of
alarm, of being caught napping at your post.
Then there’s the shift from LL to HL. This is when a homeless guy
finds someone’s wallet and does cartwheels to return it—and you realize
that he’s more decent than half your friends.
Most interesting to me is the transition from LH status to LL, which
invokes gloating, glee, schadenfreude. I remember a great example of
this in the 1970s, when Nigeria nationalized its oil industry and there
was the (delusionally misplaced, it turns out) belief that this would usher
in wealth and stability. I recall a Nigerian commentator crowing that
within the decade, Nigeria would be sending foreign aid to its ex–
colonial overlord, Great Britain (i.e., Brits would be shifting from LH to
LL).
The glee explains a feature of persecution of LH out-groups, namely
to first degrade and humiliate them to LL. During China’s Cultural
Revolution, resented elites were first paraded in dunce caps before being
shipped to labor camps. Nazis eliminated the mentally ill, already LL, by
unceremoniously murdering them; in contrast, premurder treatment of
the LH Jews involved forcing them to wear degrading yellow armbands,
to cut one another’s beards, to scrub sidewalks with toothbrushes before
jeering crowds. When Idi Amin expelled tens of thousands of LH Indo-
Pakistani citizens from Uganda, he first invited his army to rob, beat, and
rape them. Turning LH Thems into LL Thems accounts for some of the
worst human savagery.
These variations are sure more complicated than chimps associating
rivals with spiders.
One strange human domain is the phenomenon of developing a
grudging respect, even a sense of camaraderie, with an enemy. This is
the world of the probably-apocryphal mutual respect between opposing
World War I flying aces: “Ah, monsieur, if it were another time, I would
delight in discussing aeronautics with you over some good wine.”
“Baron, it is an honor that it is you who shoots me out of the sky.”
This one’s easy to understand—these were knights, dueling to the
gallant death, their Us-ness being their shared mastery of the new art of
aerial combat, soaring above the little people below.
But surprisingly, the same is shown by combatants who, instead of
soaring, were cannon fodder, faceless cogs in their nation’s war machine.
In the words of a British infantry grunt serving in the bloodbath of trench
415