subcortical, reflexive motor pathways. Again, there’s a trade-off—
increased speed by bypassing the cortex, but decreased accuracy. Thus
the input shortcut may prompt you to see the cell phone as a gun. And
the output shortcut may prompt you to pull a trigger before you
consciously mean to.
Arousal. Ultimately, amygdala outputs are mostly about setting off
alarms throughout the brain and body. As we saw, the core of the
amygdala is the central amygdala.31 Axonal projections from there go to
an amygdala-ish structure nearby called the bed nucleus of the stria
terminalis (BNST). The BNST, in turn, projects to parts of the
hypothalamus that initiate the hormonal stress response (see chapter 4),
as well as to midbrain and brain-stem sites that activate the sympathetic
nervous system and inhibit the parasympathetic nervous system.
Something emotionally arousing occurs, layer 2 limbic amygdala signals
layer 1 regions, and heart rate and blood pressure soar.*
The amygdala also activates a brain-stem structure called the locus
coeruleus, akin to the brain’s own sympathetic nervous system.32 It sends
norepinephrine-releasing projections throughout the brain, particularly
the cortex. If the locus coeruleus is drowsy and silent, so are you. If it’s
moderately activated, you’re alert. And if it’s firing like gangbusters,
thanks to inputs from an aroused amygdala, all neuronal hands are on
deck.
The amygdala’s projection pattern raises an important point.33 When
is the sympathetic nervous system going full blast? During fear, flight,
fight, and sex. Or if you’ve won the lottery, are happily sprinting down a
soccer field, or have just solved Fermat’s theorem (if you’re that kind of
person). Reflecting this, about a quarter of neurons in one hypothalamic
nucleus are involved in both sexual behavior and, when stimulated at a
higher intensity, aggressive behavior in male mice.
This has two implications. Both sex and aggression activate the
sympathetic nervous system, which in turn can influence behavior—
people feel differently about things if, say, their heart is racing versus
beating slowly. Does this mean that the pattern of your autonomic
arousal influences what you feel? Not really. But autonomic feedback
influences the intensity of what is felt. More on this in the next chapter.
The second consequence reflects a core idea of this book. Your heart
does roughly the same thing whether you are in a murderous rage or
47