victims along with all that platonic grooming. In contrast, such
consolation doesn’t occur in monkeys.8
Consolation is also shown among those heartwarming pair-bonding
prairie voles, as shown in a 2016 Nature paper from Larry Young of
Emory University, a pioneer of the vole/monogamy/vasopressin story,
along with de Waal.9 Members of a vole pair would be placed in separate
rooms. One of the pair would be either stressed (with a mild shock) or
left undisturbed; pairs were then reunited. As compared with unstressed
individuals, stressed ones would be licked and groomed more by their
partner. Partners would also match the anxiety behaviors and
glucocorticoid levels of their stressed pairmate. This didn’t occur for a
stressed stranger, nor among polygamous meadow voles. As we’ll see,
the neurobiology of this effect is all about oxytocin and the anterior
cingulate cortex.
Animals will intervene even more proactively. In one study rats
worked more (pressing a lever) to lower a distressed rat, dangling in the
air in a harness, than a suspended block. In another study rats proactively
worked to release a cagemate from a stressful restrainer. Subjects were as
motivated to do this as to get chocolate (nirvana for rats). Moreover,
when a rat could both release the cagemate and get chocolate, they’d
share it more than half the time.10
This prosociality had an Us/Them component. The authors
subsequently showed that rats would work to release even a strange rat—
so long as it was of the same strain and thus nearly genetically
identical.11 Is this automatic Us/Them-ing built on the genetics of shared
pheromone signatures (back to chapter 10)? No—if a rat is housed with a
cagemate of another strain, it will help individuals of that other strain.
And if a rat is switched at birth and raised by a female of another strain,
it helps members of its adopted but not its biological strain. “Us” is
malleable by experience, even among rodents.
Why do all these animals labor away consoling another individual in
distress, or even helping them? It’s probably not conscious application of
the Golden Rule, and it’s not necessarily for the social benefits—rats
were just as likely to release cagemates from restrainers even if they
didn’t get to interact afterward. Maybe it’s something resembling
compassion. On the other hand, maybe it’s just self-interest—“That
dangling rat’s incessant alarm calls are getting on my nerves. I’m going
524