The PNS promotes digestion; the SNS inhibits it (which makes sense—if
you’re running for your life, avoiding being someone’s lunch, don’t
waste energy digesting breakfast).* And as we will see chapter 14, if
seeing someone in pain activates your SNS, you’re likely to be
preoccupied with your own distress instead of helping; turn on the PNS,
and it’s the opposite. Given that the SNS and PNS do opposite things, the
PNS is obviously going to be releasing a different neurotransmitter from
its axon terminals—acetylcholine.*
There is a second, equally important way in which emotion
influences the body. Specifically, the hypothalamus also regulates the
release of many hormones; this is covered in chapter 4.
—
So the limbic system indirectly regulates autonomic function and
hormone release. What does this have to do with behavior? Plenty—
because the autonomic and hormonal states of the body feed back to the
brain, influencing behavior (typically unconsciously).* Stay tuned for
more in chapters 3 and 4.
The Interface Between the Limbic System and the
Cortex
Time to add the cortex. As noted, this is the brain’s upper surface (its
name comes from the Latin cortic, meaning “tree bark”) and is the
newest part of the brain.
The cortex is the gleaming, logical, analytical crown jewel of layer 3.
Most sensory information flows there to be decoded. It’s where muscles
are commanded to move, where language is comprehended and
produced, where memories are stored, where spatial and mathematical
skills reside, where executive decisions are made. It floats above the
limbic system, supporting philosophers since at least Descartes who have
emphasized the dichotomy between thought and emotion.
Of course, that’s all wrong, as shown by the temperature of a cup—
something processed in the hypothalamus—altering assessment of the
coldness of someone’s personality. Emotions filter the nature and
accuracy of what is remembered. Stroke damage to certain cortical
regions blocks the ability to speak; some sufferers reroute the cerebral
32