belief that hospitalized children do best when untouched, in antiseptic
isolation. Remarkably, hospitalism soared in hospitals with newfangled
incubators (adapted from poultry farming); the safest hospitals were poor
ones that relied on the primitive act of humans actually touching and
interacting with infants.
In the 1950s the British psychiatrist John Bowlby challenged the
view of infants as simple organisms with few emotional needs; his
“attachment theory” birthed our modern view of the mother-infant
bond.*24 In his trilogy Attachment and Loss, Bowlby summarized the
no-brainer answers we’d give today to the question “What do children
need from their mothers?”: love, warmth, affection, responsiveness,
stimulation, consistency, reliability. What is produced in their absence?
Anxious, depressed, and/or poorly attached adults.*
Bowlby inspired one of the most iconic experiments in psychology’s
history, by Harry Harlow of the University of Wisconsin; it destroyed
Freudian and behaviorist dogma about mother-infant bonding.25 Harlow
would raise an infant rhesus monkey without a mother but with two
“surrogates” instead. Both were made of a chicken-wire tube
approximating a torso, with a monkey-ish plastic head on top. One
surrogate had a bottle of milk coming from its “torso.” The other had
terry cloth wrapped around the torso. In other words, one gave calories,
the other a poignant approximation of a mother monkey’s fur. Freud and
B. F. Skinner would have wrestled over access to chicken-wire mom. But
infant monkeys chose the terry-cloth mom.* “Man cannot live by milk
alone. Love is an emotion that does not need to be bottle- or spoon-fed,”
wrote Harlow.
Evidence for the most basic need provided by a mother comes from a
controversial quarter. Starting in the 1990s, crime rates plummeted
across the United States. Why? For liberals the answer was the thriving
economy. For conservatives it was the larger budgets for policing,
expanded prisons, and three-strikes sentencing laws. Meanwhile, a
partial explanation was provided by legal scholar John Donohue of
Stanford and economist Steven Levitt of the University of Chicago—it
was the legalization of abortions. The authors’ state-by-state analysis of
the liberalization of abortion laws and the demographics of the crime
drop showed that when abortions become readily available in an area,
rates of crime by young adults decline about twenty years later. Surprise
—this was highly controversial, but it makes perfect, depressing sense to
189