For your average nineteenth-century neuroscientist, the answer was
easy. Their explanation would be that a fetal brain is made up of huge
numbers of separate neurons that slowly grow their dendritic and axonal
processes. And eventually the axon terminals of one neuron reach and
touch the dendritic spines of the next neuron(s), and they merge, forming
a continuous membrane between the two cells. From all those separate
fetal neurons, the mature brain forms this continuous, vastly complex net
of one single superneuron, which was called a “synctitium.” Thus
excitation readily flows from one neuron to the next because they aren’t
really separate neurons.
Late in the nineteenth century an alternative view emerged, namely
that each neuron remains an independent unit, and that the axon
terminals of one neuron don’t actually touch the dendritic spines of the
next. Instead there’s a tiny gap between the two. This notion was called
the “neuron doctrine.”
The adherents of the synctitium school thought that the neuron
doctrine was asinine. “Show me the gaps between axon terminals and
dendritic spines,” they demanded of these heretics, “and tell me how
excitation jumps from one neuron to the next.”
And then in 1873 it all got solved by the Italian neuroscientist
Camillo Golgi, who invented a technique for staining brain tissue in a
novel fashion. And the aforementioned Cajal used this “Golgi stain” to
stain all the processes, all the branches and branchlets and twigs of the
dendrites and axon terminals of single neurons. Crucially, the stain didn’t
spread from one neuron to the next. There wasn’t a continuous, merged
net of a single superneuron. Individual neurons are discrete entities. The
neuron doctrine-ers vanquished the synctitium-ites.*
Hooray, case closed; there are indeed micro-microscopic gaps
between axon terminals and dendritic spines; these gaps are called
“synapses” (which weren’t directly visualized, putting the last nail in the
synctitial coffin, until the invention of electron microscopy in the 1950s).
But there’s still that problem of how excitation propagates from one
neuron to the next, leaping across the synapse.
The answer, whose pursuit dominated neuroscience in the middle
half of the twentieth century, is that the electrical excitation doesn’t leap
across the synapse. Instead it gets translated into a different type of
signal.
688