derisively and said, “What a little pig, to have done such a thing to his
own family.” And then he turned the propagandists loose.
Thus even Stalin was of the same opinion as most mammals:
something’s wrong with that kid. Human social interactions are
profoundly organized around kin selection; with the rare exception of a
Pavlik Morozov, blood is thicker than water.
Naturally, until you look more closely.
For starters, yes, across cultures we are obsessed with kinship terms,
but the terms often don’t overlap with actual biological relatedness.
We certainly have clan vendettas, but we also have wars where
combatants on opposing sides have higher degrees of relatedness than do
fighters on the same side. Brothers fought on opposing sides in the Battle
of Gettysburg.58
Relatives and their armies battle over royal succession; the cousins
George V of England, Nicholas II of Russia, and Wilhelm II of Germany
happily oversaw and sponsored World War I. And intrafamily individual
violence occurs (although at extremely low rates when corrected for
amount of time spent together). There’s patricide, often an act of revenge
for a long history of abuse, and fratricide. Rarely due to conflicts over
issues of economic or reproductive importance—stolen birthrights of
biblical proportion, someone sleeping with their sibling’s spouse—
fratricide is most often about long-standing irritants and disagreements
that just happen to boil over into lethality (in early May 2016, for
example, a Florida man was charged with second-degree murder in the
killing of his brother—during a dispute over a cheeseburger). And then
there is the hideous commonness of honor killings in parts of the world,
as we’ve seen.59
The most puzzling cases of intrafamily violence, in terms of kin
selection, are of parents killing children, a phenomenon most commonly
arising from combined homicide/suicide, profound mental illness, or
abuse that unintentionally proves fatal.*60 And then there are cases
where a mother kills an unwanted child who is viewed as a hindrance—
parent/offspring conflict flecked with the spittle of madness.61
While we bequeath money to our descendants, we also give
charitably to strangers on the other side of the planet (thank you, Bill and
Melinda Gates) and adopt orphans from other continents. (Sure, as we’ll
see in a later chapter, being charitable is tinged with self-interest, and
most people who adopt kids do so because they cannot have biological
372