They were unlike any baboon troop documented, exactly like what
you’d expect if you eliminated half the adult males, producing a 2:1
female-to-male ratio instead of the typical 1:1, and if the males
remaining were particularly unaggressive and affiliative.48
They stayed close together, sat in contact, and groomed more than
average. Levels of aggression were lower, and in an informative way.
Males still had a dominance hierarchy; number three would still fight
with numbers four and two, defending his status and seeking a
promotion. But there was minimal displacement aggression onto
innocent bystanders—when number three lost a fight, he’d rarely
terrorize number ten or a female. Stress hormone levels were low; the
neurochemistry of anxiety and benzodiazepines worked differently in
these individuals.
Here’s a measure of it, a picture
that, if you’re a baboon-ologist, is
more surprising than one showing
baboons inventing the wheel—two
adult males grooming. That hardly
ever happens. Except in this troop.
And now the most important
part. Female baboons remain in
their birth troop, whereas males get
itchy around puberty and leave,
trying their luck anywhere from the
troop next door to one thirty miles
away. By the time I returned to this troop, most of the males who had
avoided the TB had died; the troop was filled with males who had
transferred in after the TB. In other words, adolescent males had grown
up in typical baboon troops and then joined this one and adopted the
style of low aggression and high affiliation. The troop’s social culture
was being transmitted.
How? Adolescents who joined the troop were no less aggressive or
displacing than those joining other troops—there wasn’t self-selection.
There was no evidence of social instruction occurring. Instead the most
likely explanation involved resident females. These were probably the
least stressed female baboons on earth, not being subject to typical male
displacement aggression. In this more relaxed state, they were more
willing to risk affiliative overtures to new individuals—in a typical
650