gets nothing. While both outcomes increased dopaminergic activity, the
bigger increase occurred after cooperation.*
Other research examined the economic behavior of punishing jerks.82
In one study subjects played a game where player B could screw over
player A for a profit. Depending on the round, player A could either (a)
do nothing, (b) punish player B by having some of player B’s money
taken (at no cost to player B), or (c) pay one unit of money to have two
units taken from player B. Punishment activated the dopamine system,
especially when subjects had to pay to punish; the greater the dopamine
increase during no-cost punishment, the more willing someone was to
pay to punish. Punishing norm violations is satisfying.
Another great study, carried out by Elizabeth Phelps of New York
University, concerns “overbidding” in auctions, where people bid more
money than anticipated.83 This is interpreted as reflecting the additional
reward of besting someone in the competitive aspect of bidding. Thus,
“winning” an auction is intrinsically socially competitive, unlike
“winning” a lottery. Winning a lottery and winning a bid both activated
dopaminergic signaling in subjects; losing a lottery had no effect, while
losing a bidding war inhibited dopamine release. Not winning the lottery
is bad luck; not winning an auction is social subordination.
This raises the specter of envy. In one neuroimaging study subjects
read about a hypothetical person’s academic record, popularity,
attractiveness, and wealth.84 Descriptions that evoked self-reported envy
activated cortical regions involved in pain perception. Then the
hypothetical individual was described as experiencing a misfortune (e.g.,
they were demoted). More activation of pain pathways at the news of the
person’s good fortune predicted more dopaminergic activation after
learning of their misfortune. Thus there’s dopaminergic activation during
schadenfreude—gloating over an envied person’s fall from grace.
The dopamine system gives insights into jealousy, resentment, and
invidiousness, leading to another depressing finding.85 A monkey has
learned that when he presses a lever ten times, he gets a raisin as a
reward. That’s just happened, and as a result, ten units of dopamine are
released in the accumbens. Now—surprise!—the monkey presses the
lever ten times and gets two raisins. Whoa: twenty units of dopamine are
released. And as the monkey continues to get paychecks of two raisins,
the size of the dopamine response returns to ten units. Now reward the
monkey with only a single raisin, and dopamine levels decline.
69