Stage 6 is also egotistical, implicitly built on self-righteousness that
trumps conventional petty bourgeois rule makers and bean counters, The
Man, those sheep who just follow, etc. To quote Emerson, as is often
done when considering the postconventional stage, “Every heroic act
measures itself by its contempt of some external good.” Stage 6
reasoning can inspire. But it can also be insufferable, premised on “being
good” and “being law abiding” as opposites. “To live outside the law,
you must be honest,” wrote Bob Dylan.
Kohlbergians found hardly anyone consistently at stage 5 or stage 6.
—
Kohlberg basically invented the scientific study of moral development in
children. His stage model is so canonical that people in the business dis
someone by suggesting they’re stuck in the primordial soup of a
primitive Kohlberg stage. As we’ll see in chapter 12, there is even
evidence that conservatives and liberals reason at different Kohlberg
stages.
Naturally, Kohlberg’s work has problems.
The usual: Don’t take any stage model too seriously—there are
exceptions, maturational transitions are not clean cut, and someone’s
stage can be context dependent.
The problem of tunnel vision and wrong emphases: Kohlberg initially studied
the usual unrepresentative humans, namely Americans, and as we will
see in later chapters, moral judgments differ cross-culturally. Moreover,
subjects were male, something challenged in the 1980s by Carol Gilligan
of NYU. The two agreed on the general sequence of stages. However,
Gilligan and others showed that in making moral judgments, girls and
women generally value care over justice, in contrast to boys and men. As
a result, females tilt toward conventional thinking and its emphasis on
relationships, while males tilt toward postconventional abstractions.18
The cognitive emphasis: Are moral judgments more the outcome of
reasoning or of intuition and emotion? Kohlbergians favor the former.
But as will be seen in chapter 13, plenty of organisms with limited
cognitive skills, including young kids and nonhuman primates, display
rudimentary senses of fairness and justice. Such findings anchor “social
intuitionist” views of moral decision making, associated with
psychologists Martin Hoffman and Jonathan Haidt, both of NYU.19
Naturally, the question becomes how moral reasoning and moral
184