not, due to BLA damage, been un-learned through negative social
experience.” In other words, the default state is to trust, and what the
amygdala does is learn vigilance and distrust.
Unexpectedly, the amygdala and one of its hypothalamic targets also
play a role in male sexual motivation (other hypothalamic nuclei are
central to male sexual performance)* but not female.* What’s that
about? One neuroimaging study sheds some light. “Young heterosexual
men” looked at pictures of attractive women (versus, as a control, of
attractive men). Passively observing the pictures activated the reward
circuitry just alluded to. In contrast, working to see the pictures—by
repeatedly pressing a button—also activated the amygdala. Similarly,
other studies show that the amygdala is most responsive to positive
stimuli when the value of the reward is shifting. Moreover, some BLA
neurons that respond in that circumstance also respond when the severity
of something aversive is shifting—these neurons are paying attention to
change, independent of direction. For them, “the amount of reward is
changing” and “the amount of punishment is changing” are the same.
Studies like these clarify that the amygdala isn’t about the pleasure of
experiencing pleasure. It’s about the uncertain, unsettled yearning for a
potential pleasure, the anxiety and fear and anger that the reward may be
smaller than anticipated, or may not even happen. It’s about how many
of our pleasures and our pursuits of them contain a corrosive vein of
disease.*24
The Amygdala as Part of Networks in the Brain
Now that we know about the subparts of the amygdala, it’s
informative to consider its extrinsic connections—i.e., what parts of the
brain send projection to it, and what parts does it project to?25
SOME INPUTS TO THE AMYGDALA
Sensory inputs. For starters, the amygdala, specifically the BLA, gets
projections from all the sensory systems.26 How else can you get
terrified by the shark’s theme music in Jaws? Normally, sensory
information from various modalities (eyes, ears, skin . . .) courses into
the brain, reaching the appropriate cortical region (visual cortex, auditory
cortex, tactile cortex . . .) for processing. For example, the visual cortex
would engage layers and layers of neurons to turn pixels of retinal
44