consequences, usually deleterious, but sometimes produce a new,
interesting protein.
Back to point mutations. Consider one that results in the substitution
of a single amino acid in the protein, one that works a bit differently
from the correct amino acid. As noted above, as a result, the protein still
does its old job, but maybe does it a bit faster or slower. This could be
the grist for evolutionary change—if the new version is disadvantageous,
reducing the reproductive success of anyone who carries it, it will be
gradually selected against, removing it from a population. If instead the
new version is more advantageous, it will gradually replace the old one
in a population. Or if the new version works better than the original in
some circumstances but worse in others, it may reach equilibrium in the
population with the original version, where a certain percentage of
people have the old version, the remainder the new. In this case the
particular gene would be described as coming in two different forms or
variants, as coming with two different “alleles.” Most genes come with
multiple alleles. And the result is individual variation in the functioning
of genes (this is covered in far more complexity in chapter 8).
Finally, a clarification of the confusion where two sound bites about
genetics collide. The first is that, on the average, full (non–identical
twin) siblings share 50 percent of their genes.* The other is that we share
98 percent of our genes with chimps. So are we more related to chimps
than to our siblings? No. Comparisons between humans and chimps are
about types of traits—we both have genes coding for traits related to
having, for example, eyes, muscle fibers, or dopamine receptors, and
both lack genes related to having, for example, gills, antennae, or flower
petals. So there’s 98 percent overlap at that level of comparison. But
comparison between any two humans is about versions of those traits—
both have a gene that codes for, say, this thing called eye color, but do
they share the version that codes for the same particular color? Same for
blood type, type of dopamine receptor, and so on. We have 50 percent
overlap with siblings at this level of comparison.
716