This book’s focus is not really how good a liar someone is. It’s
whether we lie, whether we do the harder thing and resist the temptation
to deceive. For more understanding of that, we turn to a pair of
thoroughly cool neuroimaging studies where subjects who lied did so not
because they were instructed to but because they were dirty rotten
cheaters.
The first was carried out by the Swiss scientists Thomas
Baumgartner, Ernst Fehr (whose work has been noted previously), and
colleagues.42 Subjects played an economic trust game where, in each
round, you could be cooperative or selfish. Beforehand a subject would
tell the other player what their strategy would be
(always/sometimes/never cooperate). In other words, they made a
promise.
Some subjects who promised to always cooperate broke their
promise at least once. At such times there was activation of the dlPFC,
the ACC, and, of course, the amygdala.*43
A pattern of brain activation before each round’s decision predicted
breaking of a promise. Fascinatingly, along with predictable activation of
the ACC, there’d be activation of the insula. Does the scoundrel think,
“I’m disgusted with myself, but I’m going to break my promise”? Or is it
“I don’t like this guy because of X; in fact, he’s kind of disgusting; I owe
him nothing; I’m breaking my promise”? While it’s impossible to tell,
given our tendency to rationalize our own transgressions, I’d bet it’s the
latter.
The second study comes from Greene and colleague Joseph
Paxton.44 Subjects in a scanner would predict the outcome of coin tosses,
earning money for correct guesses. The study’s design contained an extra
layer of distracting nonsense. Subjects were told the study was about
paranormal mental abilities, and for some of the coin tosses, for this
concocted reason, rather than state their prediction beforehand, subjects
would just think about their choice and then tell afterward if they were
right. In other words, amid a financial incentive to guess correctly, there
were intermittent opportunities to cheat. Crucially, this was detectable—
during the periods of forced honesty, subjects averaged a 50 percent
success rate. And if accuracy jumped a lot higher during opportunities to
cheat, subjects were probably cheating.
The results were pretty depressing. Using this form of statistical
detection, about a third of the subjects appeared to be big-time cheaters,
516