Thompson-Cannino was raped by a stranger. In a police lineup she
identified Cotton with great certainty; despite claiming innocence, he
was convicted and sentenced to life in prison. In the years after, friends
tentatively wondered if she could now put the nightmare behind her.
“Like hell I’m able to” would be her response. She was consumed with
her hatred for Cotton, with her desire to harm him. And then, more than
ten years into his prison sentence, DNA evidence exonerated Cotton.
Another man had done it; he was incarcerated in Cotton’s prison for
other rapes and bragged about getting away with this one. Thompson-
Cannino had identified the wrong man and convinced a jury. Issues of
hatred or forgiveness were now on the other foot.
When they finally met, after Cotton’s release and pardon, Thompson-
Cannino said, “If I spent every minute of every hour of every day for the
rest of my life telling you that I’m sorry, can you ever forgive me?” And
Cotton said, “Jennifer, I forgave you years ago.” His ability to do so
involved profound reappraisal: “Forgiving Jennifer for picking me out of
that lineup as her rapist took less time than people think. I knew she was
a victim and was hurting real bad. . . . We were the victims of the same
injustice by the same man, and this gave us a common ground to stand
on.” A complete reappraisal that made them Us in their victimhood. The
two now lecture together about the need for judicial reform.
Ultimately, forgiveness is usually about one thing—“This is for me,
not for you.” Hatred is exhausting; forgiveness, or even just indifference,
is freeing. To quote Booker T. Washington, “I shall allow no man to
belittle my soul by making me hate him.” Belittle and distort and
consume. Forgiveness seems to be at least somewhat good for your
health—victims who show spontaneous forgiveness, or who have gone
through forgiveness therapy (as opposed to “anger validation therapy”)
show improvements in general health, cardiovascular function, and
symptoms of depression, anxiety, and PTSD. Chapter 14 explored how
compassion readily, perhaps inevitably, contains elements of self-
interest. The compassionate granting of forgiveness epitomizes this.41
We’ve now focused on forgiveness, apology, reparation,
reconciliation, and the extent to which TRCs were about reconciliation
rather than forgiveness. What about the “truth” part? It facilitates the
healing process enormously. In the TRCs, perpetrators spilling truth—
detailed, exhaustive, unflinching, and public—was the highest priority
641