us at our best or worst. On the converse side of context dependency,
sometimes being honest is the harder thing—telling an unpleasant truth
about another person activates the medial PFC (along with the insula).*36
Given these complexities, it is no surprise that the biology of honesty
and duplicity is very muddy.
As we saw in chapter 10, the very nature of competitive evolutionary
games selects for both deception and vigilance against it. We even saw
protoversions of both in social yeast. Dogs attempt to deceive one
another, with marginal success—when a dog is terrified, fear
pheromones emanate from his anal scent glands, and it’s not great if the
guy you’re facing off against knows you’re scared. A dog can’t
consciously choose to be deceptive by not synthesizing and secreting
those pheromones. But he can try to squelch their dissemination by
putting a lid on those glands, by putting his tail between his legs—“I’m
not scared, no siree,” squeaked Sparky.
No surprise, nonhuman primate duplicity takes things to a whole
other level.37 If there is a good piece of food and a higher-ranking animal
nearby, capuchins will give predator alarm calls to distract the other
individual; if it is a lower-ranking animal, no need; just take the food.
Similarly, if a low-ranking capuchin knows where food has been hidden
and there is a dominant animal around, he will move away from the
hiding place; if it’s a subordinate animal, no problem. The same is seen
in spider monkeys and macaques. And other primates don’t just carry out
“tactical concealment” about food. When a male gelada baboon mates
with a female, he typically gives a “copulation call.” Unless he is with a
female who has snuck away from her nearby consortship male. In which
case he doesn’t make a sound. And, of course, all of these examples pale
in comparison with what politico chimps can be up to. Reflecting
deception as a task requiring lots of social expertise, across primate
species, a larger neocortex predicts higher rates of deception,
independent of group size.*
That’s impressive. But it is highly unlikely that there is conscious
strategizing on the part of these primates. Or that they feel bad or even
morally soiled about being deceptive. Or that they actually believe their
lies. For those things we need humans.
The human capacity for deception is enormous. We have the most
complex innervation of facial muscles and use massive numbers of
motor neurons to control them—no other species can be poker-faced.
512