a pair of young Mexicans, conservatively dressed, appeared each
morning for two weeks, chatting quietly in Spanish before boarding the
train. Then commuters filled out second questionnaires.
Remarkably, the presence of such pairs made people more supportive
of decreasing legal immigration from Mexico and of making English the
official language, and more opposed to amnesty for illegal immigrants.
The manipulation was selective, not changing attitudes about Asian
Americans, African Americans, or Middle Easterners.
How’s this for a fascinating influence on Us/Them-ing, way below
the level of awareness: Chapter 4 noted that when women are ovulating,
their fusiform face areas respond more to faces, with the (“emotional”)
vmPFCs responding more to men’s faces in particular. Carlos Navarrete
at Michigan State University has shown that white women, when
ovulating, have more negative attitudes toward African American
men.*38 Thus the intensity of Us/Them-ing is being modulated by
hormones. Our feelings about Thems can be shaped by subterranean
forces we haven’t a clue about.
Automatic features of Us/Them-ing can extend to magical contagion,
a belief that the essentialism of people can transfer to objects or other
organisms.39 This can be a plus or a minus—one study showed that
washing a sweater worn by JFK would decrease its value at auction,
whereas sterilizing one worn by Bernie Madoff would increase its value.
This is sheer irrationality—it’s not like an unwashed JFK sweater still
contains his magical armpit essence, while an unwashed Madoff sweater
swarms with moral-taint cooties. And magical contagion has occurred
elsewhere—Nazis killed supposedly contaminated “Jewish dogs” along
with their owners.*40
The heart of cognition catching up with affect is, of course,
rationalization. A great example of this occurred in 2000, when everyone
learned the phrase “hanging chads” following the election of Al Gore
and the Supreme Court’s selection of George W. Bush.* For those who
missed that fun, a chad is the piece of paper knocked out of a punch-card
ballot when someone votes, and a hanging chad is one that doesn’t
completely detach; does this justify disqualifying the vote, even though it
is clear who the person voted for? And obviously, if one millisecond
before chads reared their hanging heads, you had asked pundits what
would be the hanging-chad stances of the party of Reagan and trickle-
down economics, and the party of FDR and the Great Society, they
405