ANY KIND OF MOTHER IN A STORM
H
arlow provided another important lesson, thanks to another study
painful to contemplate. Infant monkeys were raised with chicken-
wire surrogates with air jets in the middle of their torsos. When an infant
clung, she’d receive an aversive blast of air. What would a behaviorist
predict that the monkey would do when faced with such punishment?
Flee. But, as in the world of abused children and battered partners,
infants held harder.
Why do we often become attached to a source of negative
reinforcement, seek solace when distressed from the cause of that
distress? Why do we ever love the wrong person, get abused, and return
for more?
Psychological insights abound. Because of poor self-esteem,
believing you’ll never do better. Or a codependent conviction that it’s
your calling to change the person. Maybe you identify with your
oppressor, or have decided it’s your fault and the abuser is justified, so
they seem less irrational and terrifying. These are valid and can have
huge explanatory and therapeutic power. But work by Regina Sullivan of
NYU demonstrates bits of this phenomenon miles from the human
psyche.
Sullivan would condition rat pups to associate a neutral odor with a
shock.27 If a pup that had been conditioned at ten days of age or older
(“older pups”) was exposed to that odor, logical things happened—
amygdala activation, glucocorticoid secretion, and avoidance of the odor.
But do the same to a younger pup and none of that would occur;
remarkably, the pup would be attracted to the odor.
Why? There is an interesting wrinkle related to stress in newborns.
Rodent fetuses are perfectly capable of secreting glucocorticoids. But
within hours of birth, the adrenal glands atrophy dramatically, becoming
barely able to secrete glucocorticoids. This “stress hyporesponsive
period” (SHRP) wanes over the coming weeks.28
What is the SHRP about? Glucocorticoids have so many adverse
effects on brain development (stay tuned) that the SHRP represents a
gamble—“I won’t secrete glucocorticoids in response to stress, so that I
192