DUCT TAPE
T
he essence of a symbol is its ability to serve as a stand-in for the
real thing and, remarkably, we’re not the only species where a
signifier, independent of what it signifies, can gain a power of its own.
As discussed in chapter 2, if you condition a rat to associate a bell with a
reward, about half of rats eventually come to find the bell itself
rewarding.
So we’ve now examined cold drinks and cold personalities; lying
through your teeth and then yearning for mouthwash; our hearts aching
for someone else’s pain. Our metaphorical symbols can gain a power all
their own. But insofar as metaphors are the apogee of our capacity for
symbolic thought, it’s thoroughly weird that our top-of-the-line brains
can’t quite keep things straight and remember that those metaphors
aren’t literal. Why?
The answer harks back to a concept first introduced in chapter 10—
evolution is a tinkerer, an improviser. So humans are evolving capacities
for abstractions like morality and deep violations of it, for experiencing
empathy of unprecedented intensity, and for conscious assessment of the
affiliative nature of someone’s temperament—moral disgust, feeling
someone’s pain, warm and cold personalities. Given how short a time
behaviorally modern humans have existed, this has occurred in a blink of
an eye. There hasn’t been enough time to evolve completely new brain
regions and circuits for handling these novelties. Instead, tinkering
occurred—“Hmm, extreme negative affect elicited by violations of
shared behavioral norms. Let’s see . . . Who has any pertinent
experience? I know, the insula! It does extreme negative sensory stimuli
—that’s, like, all that it does—so let’s expand its portfolio to include this
moral disgust business. That’ll work. Hand me a shoehorn and some duct
tape.”
The key to evolution as an improviser rather than inventor is chapter
10’s concept of exaptation—some trait evolves for some purpose and is
co-opted when it turns out to be useful for something else. And soon
feathers are aiding flight, in addition to regulating body temperature, and
569