ADOLESCENT VIOLENCE
O
bviously, the adolescent years are not just about organizing bake
sales to fight global warming. Late adolescence and early
adulthood are when violence peaks, whether premeditated or impulsive
murder, Victorian fisticuffs or handguns, solitary or organized (in or out
of a uniform), focused on a stranger or on an intimate partner. And then
rates plummet. As has been said, the greatest crime-fighting tool is a
thirtieth birthday.
On a certain level the biology underlying the teenaged mugger is
similar to that of the teen who joins the Ecology Club and donates his
allowance to help save the mountain gorillas. It’s the usual—heightened
emotional intensity, craving for peer approval, novelty seeking, and, oh,
that frontal cortex. But that’s where similarities end.
What underlies the adolescent peak in violence? Neuroimaging
shows nothing particularly distinct about it versus adult violence.30
Adolescent and adult psychopaths both have less sensitivity of the PFC
and the dopamine system to negative feedback, less pain sensitivity, and
less amygdaloid/frontal cortical coupling during tasks of moral reasoning
or empathy.
Moreover, the adolescent peak of violence isn’t caused by the surge
in testosterone; harking back to chapter 4, testosterone no more causes
violence in adolescents than it does in adult males. Moreover,
testosterone levels peak during early adolescence, but violence peaks
later.
The next chapter considers some of the roots of adolescent violence.
For now, the important point is that an average adolescent doesn’t have
the self-regulation or judgment of an average adult. This can prompt us
to view teenage offenders as having less responsibility than adults for
criminal acts. An alternative view is that even amid poorer judgment and
self-regulation, there is still enough to merit equivalent sentencing. The
former view has held in two landmark Supreme Court decisions.
In the first, 2005’s Roper v. Simmons, the Court ruled 5–4 that
executing someone for crimes committed before age eighteen is
unconstitutional, violating the Eighth Amendment ban on cruel and
168