supporting this is the finding that priming people to think about their
mortality makes them more conservative.41
These differences in threat perception help explain the differing
views as to role of government—providing for people (the leftist view;
social services, education, etc.) or protecting people (the rightist view;
law and order, the military, etc.).*
Fear, anxiety, the terror of mortality—it must be a drag being right-
wing. But despite that, in a multinational study, rightists were happier
than leftists.42 Why? Perhaps it’s having simpler answers, unburdened by
motivated correction. Or, as favored by the authors, because system
justification allows conservatives to rationalize and be less discomfited
by inequality. And as economic inequality rises, the happiness gap
between the Right and the Left increases.
As emphasized, political ideology is just one manifestation of
intellectual and emotional style. As a great example, a four-year-old’s
openness to a new toy predicts how open she’ll be as an adult to, say, the
United States forging new relations with Iran or Cuba.43
And of Course, Some Underlying Biology
We’ve now seen that political orientation is usually stable and
internally consistent across a range of disparate issues, and that it is
typically merely one manifestation of a package of cognitive and
affective style. Stepping deeper, what are the biological correlates of
differing political orientations?
Back to the insular cortex and its role in mediating gustatory and
olfactory disgust in mammals and in mediating moral disgust in humans.
Recall from the last chapter how you can reliably stoke hatred of Thems
by making them seem viscerally disgusting. When people’s insulae
activate at the thought of Thems, you can check one thing off your
genocide to-do list.
This recalls a remarkable finding—stick subjects in a room with a
smelly garbage can, and they become more socially conservative.44 If
your insula is gagging from the smell of dead fish, you’re more likely to
decide that a social practice of an Other that is merely different is,
instead, just plain wrong.
453