stress, your health suffers. It is a rare human who sickens because they
can’t activate the stress response when it is needed. Instead, we get sick
from activating the stress response too often, too long, and for purely
psychological reasons. Crucially, the beneficial effects of the stress
response for sprinting zebras and lions play out over the course of
seconds to minutes. But once you take stress to the time course of this
chapter (henceforth referred to as “sustained” stress), you’ll be dealing
with adverse consequences. Including some unwelcome effects on the
behaviors that fill this book.
A Brief Digression: Stress That We Love
Either running from a lion or dealing with years of traffic jams is a
drag. Which contrasts with stress that we love.68
We love stress that is mild and transient and occurs in a benevolent
context. The stressful menace of a roller-coaster ride is that it will make
us queasy, not that it will decapitate us; it lasts for three minutes, not
three days. We love that kind of stress, clamor for it, pay to experience it.
What do we call that optimal amount of stress? Being engaged,
engrossed, and challenged. Being stimulated. Playing. The core of
psychological stress is loss of control and predictability. But in
benevolent settings we happily relinquish control and predictability to be
challenged by the unexpected—a dip in the roller-coaster tracks, a plot
twist, a difficult line drive heading our way, an opponent’s unexpected
chess move. Surprise me—this is fun.
This brings up a key concept, namely the inverted U. The complete
absence of stress is aversively boring. Moderate, transient stress is
wonderful—various aspects of brain function are enhanced;
glucocorticoid levels in that range enhance dopamine release; rats work
at pressing levers in order to be infused with just the right amount of
glucocorticoids. And as stress becomes more severe and prolonged,
those good effects disappear (with, of course, dramatic individual
differences as to where the transition from stress as stimulatory to
overstimulatory occurs; one person’s nightmare is another’s hobby).*
124