because visceral disgust is an aversive state—inducing a sense of
sadness, rather than disgust, doesn’t have the same effect; moreover,
moralizing about purity, while predicted by people’s propensity toward
feeling disgust, is not predicted by propensities toward fear or anger.*
The physiological core of gustatory disgust is to protect yourself
against pathogens. The core of the intermixing of visceral and moral
disgust is a sense of threat as well. A socially conservative stance about,
say, gay marriage is not just that it is simply wrong in an abstract sense,
or even “disgusting,” but that it constitutes a threat—to the sanctity of
marriage and family values. This element of threat is shown in a great
study in which subjects either did or didn’t read an article about the
health risks of airborne bacteria.15 All then read a history article that
used imagery of America as a living organism, with statements like
“Following the Civil War, the United States underwent a growth spurt.”
Those who read about scary bacteria before thinking about the United
States as an organism were then more likely to express negative views
about immigration (without changing attitudes about an economic issue).
My guess is that people with a stereotypically conservative exclusionary
stance about immigration rarely have the sense that they feel disgusted
that people elsewhere in the world would want to come to the United
States for better lives. Instead there is threat by the rabble, the unwashed
masses, to the nebulous entity that is the American way of life.
How cerebral is this intertwining of moral and visceral disgust? Does
the insula get involved in moral disgust only if it’s of a particularly
visceral nature—blood and guts, coprophagia, body parts? Paul Bloom
suggests this is the case. In contrast, Jonathan Haidt feels that even the
most cognitive forms of moral disgust (“He’s a chess grand master and
he shows off by beating that eight-year-old in three moves and reducing
her to tears—that’s disgusting”) are heavily intertwined.16 In support of
that, something as unvisceral as getting a lousy offer in an economic
game activates the insula (a lousy offer from another human, rather than
a computer, that is); the more insula activation, the greater the likelihood
of the offer being rejected. Amid this debate, it is clear that the
intertwining of visceral and moral disgust is, at the least, greatest when
the latter taps into core disgust. To repeat a neat quote from Paul Rozin,
introduced in chapter 11, “Disgust serves as an ethnic or out-group
marker.” First you’re disgusted by how Others smell, a gateway to then
being disgusted by how Others think.
562