overlapping networks of frontal and limbic structures activate for the two
tasks. But with adolescents the two profiles are the same. “What do you
think about yourself?” is neurally answered with “Whatever everyone
else thinks about me.”23
The frantic adolescent need to belong is shown beautifully in studies
of the neurobiology of social exclusion. Naomi Eisenberger of UCLA
developed the fiendishly clever “Cyberball” paradigm to make people
feel snubbed.24 The subject lies in a brain scanner, believing she is
playing an online game with two other people (naturally, they don’t exist
—it’s a computer program). Each player occupies a spot on the screen,
forming a triangle. The players toss a virtual ball among themselves; the
subject is picking whom to throw to and believes the other two are doing
the same. The ball is tossed for a while; then, unbeknownst to the
subject, the experiment begins—the other two players stop throwing the
ball to her. She’s being excluded by those creeps. In adults there is
activation of the periaqueductal gray, anterior cingulate, amygdala, and
insular cortex. Perfect—these regions are central to pain perception,
anger, and disgust.* And then, after a delay, the ventrolateral PFC
activates; the more activation, the more the cingulate and insula are
silenced and the less subjects report being upset afterward. What’s this
delayed vlPFC activation about? “Why am I getting upset? This is just a
stupid game of catch.” The frontal cortex comes to the rescue with
perspective, rationalization, and emotion regulation.
Now do the study with teenagers. Some show the adult neuroimaging
profiles; these are ones who rate themselves as least sensitive to rejection
and who spend the most time with friends. But for most teenagers, when
social exclusion occurs, the vlPFC barely activates; the other changes are
bigger than in adults, and the subjects report feeling lousier—adolescents
lack sufficient frontal forcefulness to effectively hand-wave about why it
doesn’t matter. Rejection hurts adolescents more, producing that stronger
need to fit in.25
One neuroimaging study examined a neural building block of
conformity.26 Watch a hand moving, and neurons in premotor regions
that contribute to moving your own hand become a bit active—your
brain is on the edge of imitating the movement. In the study, ten-year-
olds watched film clips of hand movements or facial expressions; those
most vulnerable to peer influence (assessed on a scale developed by
Steinberg)* had the most premotor activation—but only for emotional
163