with another sixth on the statistical border. When cheaters cheated, there
was activation of the dlPFC, as we’d expect. Were they struggling with
the combination of moral and cognitive conflict? Not particularly—there
wasn’t activation of the ACC, nor was there the slight lag time in
response. Cheaters typically didn’t cheat at every opportunity; what did
things look like when they resisted? Here’s where you saw the struggling
—even greater activation of the dlPFC (along with the vlPFC), the ACC
roaring into action, and a significant delay in response time. In other
words, for people capable of cheating, the occasional resistance seems to
be the outcome of major neurobiological Sturm und Drang.
—
And now for probably the most important finding in this chapter. What
about subjects who never cheated? There are two very different
scenarios, as framed by Greene and Paxton: Is resisting temptation at
every turn an outcome of “will,” of having a stoked dlPFC putting Satan
into a hammerlock of submission? Or is it an act of “grace,” where
there’s no struggle, because it’s simple; you don’t cheat?
It was grace. In those who were always honest, the dlPFC, vlPFC,
and ACC were in veritable comas when the chance to cheat arose.
There’s no conflict. There’s no working hard to do the right thing. You
simply don’t cheat.
Resisting temptation is as implicit as walking up stairs, or thinking
“Wednesday” after hearing “Monday, Tuesday,” or as that first piece of
regulation we mastered way back when, being potty trained. As we saw
in chapter 7, it’s not a function of what Kohlbergian stage you’re at; it’s
what moral imperatives have been hammered into you with such urgency
and consistency that doing the right thing has virtually become a spinal
reflex.
This is not to suggest that honesty, even impeccable honesty that
resists all temptation, can only be the outcome of implicit automaticity.45
We can think and struggle and employ cognitive control to produce
similar stainless records, as shown in some subsequent work. But in
circumstances like the Greene and Paxton study, with repeated
opportunities to cheat in rapid succession, it’s not going to be a case of
successfully arm wrestling the devil over and over. Instead, automaticity
is required.
517