Tutsi refugee populations in neighboring countries gave rise to rebel
groups seeking to invade Rwanda and establish safe havens there for
Tutsis. Predictably, this increased anti-Tutsi militancy among Hutus and
resulted in further discrimination and massacres. One of the ironies of
what was to come, reflecting the uncertainty as to whether the Hutu and
Tutsi were historically even separate people, was that it wasn’t always
possible to distinguish the two—identity cards were required to indicate
ethnicity.
By 1994 the Rwandan president, the dictator Juvénal Habyarimana, a
Hutu military man who had seized power in 1973, was under sufficient
pressure from Tutsi rebel groups that he signed a power-sharing peace
accord with the rebels. This was viewed as a sellout by the growing
“Hutu Power” extremist bloc. On April 6, 1994, Habyarimana’s plane
was shot down by a missile as it approached the capital, Kigali, killing
all on board. It is still unclear whether the assassination was carried out
by Tutsi rebels or Hutu Power elements in the military who were intent
on both eliminating Habyarimana and laying the blame on Tutsis. In any
case, within a day Hutu militants had killed essentially all moderate
Hutus in the government, seized power, officially laid blame for the
assassination on Tutsis, and urged all Hutus to take revenge. And most
Hutus complied. Thus began what is now known as the Rwandan
genocide.*
The killing ran for approximately one hundred days (until it was
finally halted by Tutsi rebels gaining control). During that time, there
was not only a Final Solution–style attempt to kill every Tutsi in Rwanda
but also killing of Hutus who were married to Tutsis, who attempted to
protect Tutsis, or who refused to participate in killings. By the time it
was done, approximately 75 percent of Tutsis—between 800,000 and
1,000,000 people—and around 100,000 Hutu had been killed. Roughly
one out of every seven Rwandans. This translated into five times the rate
of killing during the Nazi Holocaust. It was mostly ignored by the
West.28
Five times the rate. For those of us schooled in the modern Western
world’s atrocities, some translation is needed. The Rwandan genocide
did not involve tanks, airplanes dropping bombs, or shelling of civilians.
There were no concentration camps, no transport trains, no Zyklon B.
There was no bureaucratic banality of evil. There were hardly even many
guns. Instead Hutu—from peasant farmers to urban professionals—
572