POSTSCRIPT: NOW FOR THE HARD
PART
W
ell, so much for the criminal justice system. Now on to the really
difficult part, which is what to do when someone compliments
your zygomatic arches.
If we deny free will when it comes to the worst of our behaviors, the
same must also apply to the best. To our talents, displays of willpower
and focus, moments of bursting creativity, decency, and compassion.
Logically it should seem as ludicrous to take credit for those traits as to
respond to a compliment on the beauty of your cheekbones by thanking
the person for implicitly having praised your free will, instead of
explaining how mechanical forces acted upon the zygomatic arches of
your skull.
It will be so difficult to act that way. I am willing to admit that I have
acted egregiously in this regard. My wife and I have brunch with a
friend, who serves fruit salad. We proclaim, “Wow, the pineapple is
delicious.” “They’re out of season,” our host smugly responds, “but I
lucked out and found a decent one.” My wife and I express awestruck
worship—“You really know how to pick fruit. You are a better person
than we are.” We are praising the host for this supposed display of free
will, for the choice made at the fork in life’s road that is pineapple
choosing. But we’re wrong. In reality, genes had something to do with
the olfactory receptors our host has that help detect ripeness. Maybe our
host comes from a people whose deep and ancient cultural values include
learning how to feel up a pineapple to tell if it’s good. The sheer luck of
the socioeconomic trajectory of our host’s life has provided the resources
to prowl an overpriced organic market playing Peruvian folk Muzak. Yet
we praise our host.
I can’t really imagine how to live your life as if there is no free will.
It may never be possible to view ourselves as the sum of our biology.
Perhaps we’ll have to settle for making sure our homuncular myths are
benign, and save the heavy lifting of truly thinking rationally for where it
matters—when we judge others harshly.
614