Obviously, this many pages into the book, I feel that the interaction of
reasoning and feeling is key.
Have People Really Gotten Less Awful?
This has been very contentious. Pinker offers the sound bite “We
may be living in the most peaceful era in our species’ existence.” The
fact most driving this optimism is that, except for the Balkan wars,
Europe has been at peace since 1945, the longest stretch in history. For
Pinker, this “Long Peace” represents the West coming to its senses after
the ruin of World War II, seeing how the advantages of being a common
market outweigh those of being a perpetually warring continent, plus
some expanding empathy thrown in on the side.
Critics characterize this as Eurocentrism. Western countries may
kumbaya one another, but they’ve sure made war elsewhere—France in
Indochina and Algeria, Britain in Malaya and Kenya, Portugal in Angola
and Mozambique, the USSR in Afghanistan, the United States in
Vietnam, Korea, and Latin America. Moreover, parts of the developing
world have been continuously at war for decades—consider the eastern
Congo. Most important, such wars have been made bloodier because the
West invented the idea of having client states fight proxy wars for them.
After all, the late twentieth century saw the United States and USSR arm
the warring Somalia and Ethiopia, only to switch to arming the other
side within a few years. The Long Peace has been for Westerners.
The claim of violence declining steadily over the last millennium
also must accommodate the entire bloody twentieth century. World War
II killed 55 million people, more than any conflict in history. Throw in
World War I, Stalin, Mao, and the Russian and Chinese civil wars, and
you’re up to 130 million.
Pinker does something sensible that reflects his being a scientist. He
corrects for total population size. Thus, while the eighth century’s An
Lushan Rebellion and civil war in Tang dynasty China killed “only” 36
million, that represented one sixth of the world’s population—the
equivalent of 429 million in the midtwentieth century. When deaths are
expressed as a percentage of total population, World War II is the only
twentieth-century event cracking the top ten, behind An Lushan, the
Mongol conquests, the Mideast slave trade, the fall of the Ming dynasty,
619