Finally, the frontal cortex has a unique cell type. In general, the
human brain isn’t unique because we’ve evolved unique types of
neurons, neurotransmitters, enzymes, and so on. Human and fly
neurons are remarkably similar; the uniqueness is quantitative—
for every fly neuron, we have a gazillion more neurons and a
bazillion more connections.37
The sole exception is an obscure type of neuron with a distinctive
shape and pattern of wiring, called von Economo neurons (aka spindle
neurons). At first they seemed to be unique to humans, but we’ve now
found them in other primates, whales, dolphins, and elephants.* That’s
an all-star team of socially complex species.
Moreover, the few von Economo neurons occur only in two
subregions of the frontal cortex, as shown by John Allman at Caltech.
One we’ve heard about already—the insula, with its role in gustatory and
moral disgust. The second is an equally interesting area called the
anterior cingulate. To give a hint (with more to come), it’s central to
empathy.
So from the standpoint of evolution, size, complexity, development,
genetics, and neuron type, the frontal cortex is distinctive, with the
human version the most unique.
The Subregions of the Frontal Cortex
Frontal cortical anatomy is hellishly complicated, and there are
debates as to whether some parts of the primate frontal cortex even exist
in “simpler” species. Nonetheless, there are some useful broad themes.
In the very front is the prefrontal cortex (PFC), the newest part of the
frontal cortex. As noted, the frontal cortex is central to executive
function. To quote George W. Bush, within the frontal cortex, it’s the
PFC that is “the decider.” Most broadly, the PFC chooses between
conflicting options—Coke or Pepsi; blurting out what you really think or
restraining yourself; pulling the trigger or not. And often the conflict
being resolved is between a decision heavily driven by cognition and one
driven by emotions.
Once it has decided, the PFC sends orders via projections to the rest
of the frontal cortex, sitting just behind it. Those neurons then talk to the
50