books, academic journals, conferences, and Southern studies majors in
universities. Much of this work was pioneered by Nisbett.27
Hospitality, chivalry toward women, and emphasis on social decorum
and etiquette are long associated with the South.28 In addition, the South
traditionally emphasizes legacy, long cultural memory, and continuity of
family—in rural Kentucky in the 1940s, for example, 70 percent of men
had the same first name as their father, far more than in the North. When
coupled with lesser mobility in the South, honor in need of defense
readily extends to family, clan, and place. For example, by the time the
Hatfields and McCoys famously began their nearly thirty-year feud in
1863,* they had lived in the same region of the West Virginia/Kentucky
border for nearly a century. The Southern sense of honor in place is also
seen in Robert E. Lee; he opposed Southern secession, even made some
ambiguous statements that could be viewed as opposed to slavery. Yet
when offered the command of the Union Army by Lincoln, Lee wrote, “I
wish to live under no other government and there is no sacrifice I am not
ready to make for the preservation of the Union save that of honor.”
When Virginia chose secession, he regretfully fulfilled his sense of honor
to his home and led the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia.
In the South, defense of honor was, above all, an act of self-
reliance.29 The Southerner Andrew Jackson was advised by his dying
mother to never seek redress from the law for any grievances, to instead
be a man and take things into his own hands. That he certainly did, with
a history of dueling (even fatally) and brawling; on his final day as
president, he articulated two regrets in leaving office—that he “had been
unable to shoot Henry Clay or to hang John C. Calhoun.” Carrying out
justice personally was viewed as a requirement in the absence of a
functional legal system. At best, legal justice and individual justice were
in uneasy equilibrium in the nineteenth-century South; in the words of
the Southern historian Bertram Wyatt-Brown, “Common law and lynch
law were ethically compatible. The first enabled the legal profession to
present traditional order, and the second conferred upon ordinary men
the prerogative of ensuring that community values held ultimate
sovereignty.”
The core of retribution for honor violations was, of course, violence.
Sticks and stones might break your bones, but names will cause you to
break the offender’s bones. Dueling was commonplace, the point being
not that you were willing to kill but that you were willing to die for your
284