We carry various taxonomies in our heads as to our relationships with
different types of Others. Thinking about some Thems is simple.
Consider someone who pushes all our judgmental buttons—say, a
homeless junkie whose wife threw him out of the house because of his
abusiveness, and who now mugs elderly people. Throw ’im under a
trolley—people are most likely to agree to sacrifice one to save five
when the five are in-group members and the one is this extreme of an
out-group.*56
But what about Thems who evoke more complex feelings?
Tremendously influential work has been done by Fiske, with her
“stereotype content model.”57 This entire section concerns that work.
We tend to categorize Thems along two axes: “warmth” (is the
individual or group a friend or foe, benevolent or malevolent?) and
“competence” (how effectively can the individual or group carry out
their intentions?).
The axes are independent. Ask subjects to assess someone about
whom they have only minimal information. Priming them with cues
about the person’s status alters ratings of competence but not of warmth.
Prime them about the person’s competitiveness and you do the opposite.
These two axes produce a matrix with four corners. There are groups that
we rate as being high in both warmth and competence—Us, naturally.
And Americans typically view this group as containing good Christians,
African American professionals, and the middle class.
And there’s the other extreme, low in both warmth and competence
—our homeless, addicted mugger. Subjects typically hand out low-
warmth/low-competence assessments for the homeless, people on
welfare, and poor people of any race.
Then there’s the high-warmth/low-competence categorization—the
mentally disabled, people with handicaps, the elderly.* And the
categorization of low warmth/high competence. It’s how people in the
developing world tend to view the European culture that used to rule
them,* and how many minority Americans view whites. It’s the hostile
stereotype of Asian Americans by white America, of Jews in Europe, of
Indo-Pakistanis in East Africa, of Lebanese in West Africa, and of ethnic
Chinese in Indonesia (and, to a lesser extent, of rich people by poorer
people everywhere). And it’s the same derogation—they’re cold, greedy,
cleverly devious, clannish, don’t assimilate,* have loyalties elsewhere—
413