behavior. During stressful periods, support seeking rose among subjects
with the receptor variant associated with enhanced sensitivity to social
feedback and approval—but only among the Americans (including
Korean Americans). What does oxytocin do to support-seeking
behavior? It depends on whether you’re stressed. And on the genetic
variant of your oxytocin receptor. And on your culture. More to come in
chapters 8 and 9.
And the Dark Side of These Neuropeptides
As we saw, oxytocin (and vasopressin) decreases aggression in
rodent females. Except for aggression in defense of one’s pups, which
the neuropeptide increases via effects in the central amygdala (with its
involvement in instinctual fear).43
This readily fits with these neuropeptides enhancing maternalism,
including snarling don’t-get-one-step-closer maternalism. Similarly,
vasopressin enhances aggression in paternal prairie vole males. This
finding comes with a familiar additional contingency. The more
aggressive the male prairie vole, the less that aggression decreases after
blocking of his vasopressin system—just as in the case of testosterone,
with increased experience, aggression is maintained by social learning
rather than by a hormone/neuropeptide. Moreover, vasopressin increases
aggression most in male rodents who are already aggressive—yet
another biological effect depending on individual and social context.44
And now to really upend our view of these feel-good neuropeptides.
For starters, back to oxytocin enhancing trust and cooperation in an
economic game—but not if the other player is anonymous and in a
different room. When playing against strangers, oxytocin decreases
cooperation, enhances envy when luck is bad, and enhances gloating
when it’s good.45
Finally, beautiful studies by Carsten de Dreu of the University of
Amsterdam showed just how unwarm and unfuzzy oxytocin can be.46 In
the first, male subjects formed two teams; each subject chose how much
of his money to put into a pot shared with teammates. As usual, oxytocin
increased such generosity. Then participants played the Prisoner’s
Dilemma with someone from the other team.* When financial stakes
were high, making subjects more motivated, oxytocin made them more
113