The previous chapter examined the remarkable consistency in
Us/Them orientations—people who dislike a particular out-group on
economic grounds are likelier than chance to dislike another group on
historical grounds, another on cultural, and so on.32 Much the same is
true here—social, economic, environmental, and international political
orientations tend to come in a package. This consistency explains the
humor behind a New Yorker cartoon (pointed out by the political
psychologist John Jost) showing a woman modeling a dress for her
husband and asking, “Does this dress make me look Republican?”
Another example concerns the bioethicist Leon Kass, who not only has
had influential conservative stances on human cloning, finding the
possibility “repugnant,” but also finds it repugnant when people display
the “catlike activity” of licking ice cream cones in public. More to come
on his issues, including with licking ice cream cones. What this internal
consistency suggests is that political ideology is merely one
manifestation of broader, underlying ideology—as we’ll see, this helps
explain conservatives being more likely than liberals to have cleaning
supplies in their bedrooms.
Naturally, strict consistency in political ideology isn’t always the
rule. Libertarians are a mixture of social liberalism and economic
conservatism; conversely, black Baptist churches are traditionally
economically liberal but socially conservative (for example, rejecting
both gay rights and the idea that gay rights are a form of civil rights).
Moreover, neither extreme of political ideology is monolithic (and
ignoring that, I’ll be simplifying throughout by using “liberal” and “left-
wing” interchangeably, as well as “conservative” and “right-wing”).
Nonetheless, the building blocks of political orientation tend to be
stable and internally consistent. It’s usually possible to dress like a
Republican or lick ice cream like a Democrat.
Implicit Factors Underlying Political Orientation
If political ideology is but one manifestation of larger internal forces
pertinent to everything from cleaning supplies in the bedroom to ice
cream consumption, are there psychological, affective, cognitive, and
visceral ways in which leftists and rightists tend to differ? This question
has produced deeply fascinating findings; I’ll try to corral them into
some categories.
447