OBEDIENCE AND CONFORMITY,
DISOBEDIENCE AND NONCONFORMITY
S
o humans have multiple simultaneous hierarchies and hierarchies
built around abstractions, and occasionally choose leaders who
labor for the common good.50 Add to that obedience to leaders. This is
utterly different from a schlub of a baboon obediently surrendering his
spot in the shade to the looming alpha male. Instead humans show
obedience to authority that transcends any given occupant of a throne
(the king is dead; long live the king), to the very notion of authority. Its
elements range from loyalty, admiration, and emulation to brownnosing,
sycophancy, and instrumental self-interest, and can range from mere
compliance (i.e., the public conformity of going along, without actually
agreeing) to drinking the Kool-Aid (i.e., identifying with the authority
and internalizing and extending its beliefs).
Obedience is closely intertwined with conformity, a concept central
to the previous chapter but considered here. Both consist of going along;
the former with the group, the latter with authority. And for us the
commonalities are what matter. Moreover, the opposites—disobedience
and nonconformity—are also intertwined and range from the
independence of marching to a different drummer to the intentionality
and mirrored determinism of anticonformity.
Importantly, these are value-free terms. Conformity can be great—
it’s helpful if everyone in a culture agrees on whether shaking your head
up and down means yes or no. Conforming is necessary for the benefits
of the wisdom of the crowd. And it can be truly comforting. But
obviously conformity can be horrendous—joining in on bullying,
oppressing, shunning, expelling, killing, just because everyone else is on
board.
Obedience can be swell too, ranging from everyone stopping at stop
signs to (to the embarrassment of my pseudoanarchist adolescence) my
kids listening when my wife and I say it’s bedtime. And malign
obedience obviously underlies “just following orders”—from goose-
456