Greene concludes (from this and additional scenarios resembling the
loop) that the intuitionist universe is very local. Killing someone
intentionally as a means to save five feels intuitively wrong, but the
intuition is strongest when the killing would occur right here, right now;
doing it in more complicated sequences of intentionality doesn’t feel as
bad. This is not because of a cognitive limit—it’s not that subjects don’t
realize the necessity of killing the person in the loop scenario. It just
doesn’t feel the same. In other words, intuitions discount heavily over
space and time. Exactly the myopia about cause and effect you’d expect
from a brain system that operates rapidly and automatically. This is the
same sort of myopia that makes sins of commission feel worse than those
of omission.
Thus these studies suggest that when a sacrifice of one requires
active, intentional, and local actions, more intuitive brain circuitry is
engaged, and ends don’t justify means. And in circumstances where
either the harm is unintentional or the intentionality plays out at a
psychological distance, different neural circuitry predominates,
producing an opposite conclusion about the morality of ends and means.
These trolleyology studies raise a larger point, which is that moral
decision making can be wildly context dependent.20 Often the key thing
that a change in context does is alter the locality of one’s intuitionist
morals, as summarized by Dan Ariely of Duke University in his
wonderful book Predictably Irrational. Leave money around a common
work area and no one takes it; it’s not okay to steal money. Leave some
cans of Coke and they’re all taken; the one-step distance from the money
involved blunts the intuitions about the wrongness of stealing, making it
easier to start rationalizing (e.g., someone must have left them out for the
taking).
The effects of proximity on moral intuitionism are shown in a
thought experiment by Peter Singer.21 You’re walking by a river in your
hometown. You see that a child has fallen in. Most people feel morally
obliged to jump in and save the child, even if the water destroys their
$500 suit. Alternatively, a friend in Somalia calls and tells you about a
poor child there who will die without $500 worth of medical care. Can
you send money? Typically not. The locality and moral discounting over
distance is obvious—the child in danger in your hometown is far more of
an Us than is this dying child far away. And this is an intuitive rather
than cognitive core—if you were walking along in Somalia and saw a
491