rodent giving birth increases vasopressin and vasopressin receptor levels
throughout the body, including the brain, of the nearby father. Among
monkeys, experienced fathers have more dendrites in frontal cortical
neurons containing vasopressin receptors. Moreover, administering
vasopressin enhances paternal behaviors. However, an ethological
caveat: this occurs only in species where males are paternal (e.g., prairie
voles and marmoset monkeys).24*
Then, dozens of millions of years ago, some rodent and primate
species independently evolved monogamous pair-bonding, along with
the neuropeptides central to the process.25 Among marmoset and titi
monkeys, which both pair-bond, oxytocin strengthens the bond,
increasing a monkey’s preference for huddling with her partner over
huddling with a stranger. Then there was a study that is embarrassingly
similar to stereotypical human couples. Among pair-bonding tamarin
monkeys, lots of grooming and physical contact predicted high oxytocin
levels in female members of a pair. What predicted high levels of
oxytocin in males? Lots of sex.
Beautiful, pioneering work by Thomas Insel of the National Institute
of Mental Health, Larry Young of Emory University, and Sue Carter of
the University of Illinois has made a species of vole arguably the most
celebrated rodent on earth.26 Most voles (e.g., montane voles) are
polygamous. In contrast, prairie voles, in a salute to Garrison Keillor,
form monogamous mating pairs for life. Naturally, this isn’t quite the
case—while they are “social pair-bonders” with their permanent
relationships, they’re not quite perfect “sexual pair-bonders,” as males
might mess around on the side. Nonetheless, prairie voles pair-bond
more than other voles, prompting Insel, Young, and Carter to figure out
why.
First finding: sex releases oxytocin and vasopressin in the nucleus
accumbens of female and male voles, respectively. Obvious theory:
prairie voles release more of the stuff during sex than do polygamous
voles, causing a more rewarding buzz, encouraging the individuals to
stick with their partner. But prairie voles don’t release more
neuropeptides than montane voles. Instead, prairie voles have more of
the pertinent receptors in the nucleus accumbens than do polygamous
voles.* Moreover, male prairie voles with a variant of the vasopressin
receptor gene that produced more receptors in the nucleus accumbens
were stronger pair-bonders. Then the scientists conducted two tour de
108