one to save five. Would you push the person with your own hands? Only
30 percent are willing; the more the vmPFC and/or amygdaloid
activation, the more likely they are to refuse.* This is hugely important
—a relatively minor variable determines whether people emphasize
moral reasoning or intuition, and they engage different brain circuits in
the process, producing radically different decisions. Greene has explored
this further.
Are people resistant to the utilitarian trade-off of killing one to save
five in the pushing scenario because of the visceral reality of actually
touching the person whom they have consigned to death? Greene’s work
suggests not—if instead of pushing with your hands, you push with a
pole, people are still resistant. There’s something about the personal
force involved that fuels the resistance.
Are people willing in the lever scenario because the victim is at a
distance, rather than right in front of them? Probably not—people are
just as willing if the lever is right next to the person who will die.
Greene suggests that intuitions about intentionality are key. In the
lever scenario, the five people are saved because the trolley has been
diverted to another track; the killing of the individual is a side effect and
the five would still have been saved if that person hadn’t been standing
on the tracks. In contrast, in the pushing scenario the five are saved
because the person is killed, and the intentionality feels intuitively
wrong. As evidence, Greene would give subjects another scenario: Here
comes the trolley, and you are rushing to throw a switch that will halt it.
Is it okay to do this if you know that in the process of lunging for the
switch, you must push a person out of the way, who falls to the ground
and dies? About 80 percent of people say yes. Same pushing the person,
same proximity, but done unintentionally, as a side effect. The person
wasn’t killed as a means to save the five. Which seems much more okay.
Now a complication. In the “loop” scenario, you pull a lever that
diverts the trolley to another track. But—oh no!—it’s just a loop; it
merges back on to the original track. The trolley will still kill the five
people—except that there’s a person on the side loop who will be killed,
stopping the trolley. This is as intentional a scenario as is pushing with
your hands—diverting to another track isn’t enough; the person has to be
killed. By all logic only about 30 percent of people should sign on, but
instead it’s in the 60 to 70 percent range.
490