glucocorticoid levels are relatively elevated in subordinate animals if: (a)
dominant individuals in bad moods frequently displace aggression onto
subordinates; (b) subordinates lack coping outlets (such as a grooming
partner); and/or (c) the social structure is such that subordinate animals
have no relatives present. And when the profile was the opposite, it was
dominant animals with the highest glucocorticoid levels.21
The “meaning” of rank and its physiological correlates also vary
between different groups of the same species. For example, while health
of subordinate baboons fared particularly badly in a troop with high rates
of dominant males displacing aggression, the health of dominant males
fared badly in a troop during a period of instability centered around the
top of the hierarchy.
And superimposed on all this, personality shapes the perception of
the reality of rank. Using the word “personality” about other species used
to cost you tenure, but it’s now a hot topic in primatology. Individuals in
other species have stable differences in temperament—how likely
someone is to displace aggression when frustrated, how socially
affiliative they are, how rattled they get by novelty, and so on. Primates
differ as to whether they see watering holes as half empty or full; in the
context of hierarchy, some individuals who are number two care only
that they’re not number one, and some individuals who are number nine
gain comfort from at least not being number ten.
Not surprisingly, personality influences the rank/health relationship.
For the same high rank, an individual is likely to be less healthy if he (a)
is particularly reactive to novelty; (b) sees threats in benign
circumstances (e.g., his rival showing up and merely taking a nap
nearby); (c) doesn’t take advantage of social control (e.g., letting a rival
determine the start of an obvious showdown); (d) doesn’t differentiate
between good and bad news (e.g., distinguishing behaviorally between
winning and losing a fight); and/or (e) doesn’t have social outlets when
frustrated. You could make a living giving baboons “how to succeed in
business” seminars built around these factors.22
Meanwhile, on the flip side, for the same low rank, an individual
tends to be healthier if (a) he has lots of grooming relationships; and/or
(b) there’s someone even lower ranking than him to serve as a target for
displaced aggression.
Thus, in other species, how does rank affect the body? It depends on
what it’s like to have a certain rank in that species and particular social
440