Let’s add hormones to this, translating some of our stress concepts
into the language of neural plasticity. Moderate, transient stress (i.e., the
good, stimulatory stress) promotes hippocampal LTP, while prolonged
stress disrupts it and promotes LTD—one reason why cognition tanks at
such times. This is the inverted-U concept of stress writ synaptic.4
Moreover, sustained stress and glucocorticoid exposure enhance LTP
and suppress LTD in the amygdala, boosting fear conditioning, and
suppress LTP in the frontal cortex. Combining these effects—more
excitable synapses in the amygdala, fewer ones in the frontal cortex—
helps explain stress-induced impulsivity and poor emotional regulation.5
Rescued from the Trash
The notion of memory resting on the strengthening of preexisting
synapses dominates the field. But ironically, the discarded idea that
memory requires the formation of new synapses has been resuscitated.
Techniques for counting all of a neuron’s synapses show that housing
rats in a rich, stimulatory environment increases their number of
hippocampal synapses.
Profoundly fancy techniques let you follow one dendritic branch of a
neuron over time as a rat learns something. Astonishingly, over minutes
to hours a new dendritic spine emerges, followed by an axon terminal
hovering nearby; over the next weeks, they form a functioning synapse
that stabilizes the new memory (and in other circumstances, dendritic
spines retract, eliminating synapses).
Such “activity-dependent synaptogenesis” is coupled to LTP—when
a synapse undergoes LTP, the tsunami of calcium rushing into the spine
can diffuse and trigger the formation of a new spine in the adjacent
stretch of the dendritic branch.
New synapses form throughout the brain—in motor-cortex neurons
when you learn a motoric task, or in the visual cortex after lots of visual
stimulation. Stimulate a rat’s whiskers a lot, and ditto in the “whisker
cortex.”6
Moreover, when enough new synapses form in a neuron, the length
and number of branches in its dendritic “tree” often expand as well,
increasing the strength and number of the neurons that can talk to it.
139