LET’S START AT THE VERY BEGINNING:
THE IMPORTANCE OF MOTHERS
N
othing like a section heading stating the obvious. Everybody needs
a mother. Even rodents; separate rat pups from Mom a few hours
daily and, as adults, they have elevated glucocorticoid levels and poor
cognitive skills, are anxious, and, if male, are more aggressive.22
Mothers are crucial. Except that well into the twentieth century, most
experts didn’t think so. The West developed child-rearing techniques
where, when compared with traditional cultures, children had less
physical contact with their mothers, slept alone at earlier ages, and had
longer latencies to be picked up when crying. Around 1900 the leading
expert Luther Holt of Columbia University warned against the “vicious
practice” of picking up a crying child or handling her too often. This was
the world of children of the wealthy, raised by nannies and presented to
their parents before bedtime to be briefly seen but not heard.
This period brought one of history’s strangest one-night stands,
namely when the Freudians and the behaviorists hooked up to explain
why infants become attached to their mothers. To behaviorists,
obviously, it’s because mothers reinforce them, providing calories when
they’re hungry. For Freudians, also obviously, infants lack the “ego
development” to form a relationship with anything/anyone other than
Mom’s breasts. When combined with children-should-be-seen-but-not-
heard-ism, this suggested that once you’ve addressed a child’s need for
nutrition, proper temperature, plus other odds and ends, they’re set to go.
Affection, warmth, physical contact? Superfluous.
Such thinking produced at least one disaster. When a child was
hospitalized for a stretch, dogma was that the mother was unnecessary—
she just added emotional tumult, and everything essential was supplied
by the staff. Typically, mothers could visit their children once a week for
a few minutes. And when kids were hospitalized for extended periods,
they wasted away with “hospitalism,” dying in droves from nonspecific
infections and gastrointestinal maladies unrelated to their original
illness.23 This was an era when the germ theory had mutated into the
188