The fuzzy distinction between innate and learned fear maps nicely
onto the amygdala’s structure. The evolutionarily ancient central
amygdala plays a key role in innate fears. Surrounding it is the
basolateral amygdala (BLA), which is more recently evolved and
somewhat resembles the fancy, modern cortex. It’s the BLA that learns
fear and then sends the news to the central amygdala.
Joseph LeDoux at New York University has shown how the BLA
learns fear.*20 Expose a rat to an innate trigger of fear—a shock. When
this “unconditioned stimulus” occurs, the central amygdala activates,
stress hormones are secreted, the sympathetic nervous system mobilizes,
and, as a clear end point, the rat freezes in place—“What was that? What
do I do?” Now do some conditioning. Before each shock, expose the rat
to a stimulus that normally does not evoke fear, such as a tone. And with
repeated coupling of the tone (the conditioned stimulus) with the shock
(the unconditioned one), fear conditioning occurs—the sound of the tone
alone elicits freezing, stress hormone release, and so on.*
LeDoux and others have shown how auditory information about the
tone stimulates BLA neurons. At first, activation of those neurons is
irrelevant to the central amygdala (whose neurons are destined to
activate following the shock). But with repeated coupling of tone with
shock, there is remapping and those BLA neurons acquire the means to
activate the central amygdala.*
BLA neurons that respond to the tone only once conditioning has
occurred would also have responded if conditioning instead had been to
a light. In other words, these neurons respond to the meaning of the
stimulus, rather than to its specific modality. Moreover, if you
electrically stimulate them, rats are easier to fear-condition; you’ve
lowered the threshold for this association to be made. And if you
electrically stimulate the auditory sensory input at the same time as
shocks (i.e., there’s no tone, just activation of the pathway that normally
carries news of the tone to the amygdala), you cause fear conditioning to
a tone. You’ve engineered the learning of a false fear.
There are synaptic changes as well. Once conditioning to a tone has
occurred, the synapses coupling the BLA and central nucleus neurons
have become more excitable; how this occurs is understood at the level
of changes in the amount of receptors for excitatory neurotransmitters in
dendritic spines in these circuits.* Furthermore, conditioning increases
levels of “growth factors,” which prompt the growth of new connections
42