For a reptile such automatic regulation is straightforward. If muscles
are working hard, this is sensed by neurons throughout the body that
send signals up the spine to layer 1 regions, resulting in signals back
down the spine that increase heart rate and blood pressure; the result is
more oxygen and glucose for the muscles. Gorge on food, and stomach
walls distend; neurons embedded there sense this and pass on the news,
and soon blood vessels in the gut dilate, increasing blood flow and
facilitating digestion. Too warm? Blood is sent to the body’s surface to
dissipate heat.
—
All of this is automatic, or “autonomic.” And thus the midbrain and
brain-stem regions, along with their projections down the spine and out
to the body, are collectively termed the “autonomic nervous system.”*
And where does the hypothalamus come in? It’s the means by which
the limbic system influences autonomic function, how layer 2 talks to
layer 1. Have a full bladder with its muscle walls distended, and
midbrain/brain-stem circuitry votes for urinating. Be exposed to
something sufficiently terrifying, and limbic structures, via the
hypothalamus, persuade the midbrain and brain stem to do the same.
This is how emotions change bodily functions, why limbic roads
eventually lead to the hypothalamus.*
The autonomic nervous system has two parts—the sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous systems, with fairly opposite functions.
The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) mediates the body’s response
to arousing circumstances, for example, producing the famed “fight or
flight” stress response. To use the feeble joke told to first-year medical
students, the SNS mediates the “four Fs—fear, fight, flight, and sex.”
Particular midbrain/brain-stem nuclei send long SNS projections down
the spine and on to outposts throughout the body, where the axon
terminals release the neurotransmitter norepinephrine. There’s one
exception that makes the SNS more familiar. In the adrenal gland,
instead of norepinephrine (aka noradrenaline) being released, it’s
epinephrine (aka the famous adrenaline).*
Meanwhile, the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) arises from
different midbrain/brain-stem nuclei that project down the spine to the
body. In contrast to the SNS and the four Fs, the PNS is about calm,
vegetative states. The SNS speeds up the heart; the PNS slows it down.
31