it, urge others to overcome that tendency, teach their children to never
call one of those neighboring chimps a “spider.” None would proclaim
that he can’t distinguish between Us chimps and Them chimps. And
these are all commonplace in progressive Western cultures.
Young humans are like chimps—six-year-olds not only prefer to be
with kids like themselves (by whatever criteria) but readily say so. It
isn’t until around age ten that kids learn that some feelings and thoughts
about Thems are expressed only at home, that communication about
Us/Them is charged and contextual.60
Thus there can be striking discrepancies in Us/Them relations
between what people claim they believe and how they act—consider
differences between election poll results and election results. This is
shown experimentally as well—in one depressing study, subjects
claimed they’d be very likely to proactively confront someone
expressing racist views; yet actual rates were far lower when they were
unknowingly put in that position (note—this is not to say that this
reflected racist sentiments; instead it likely reflected social-norm
inhibitions being stronger than the subjects’ principles).61
Attempts to control and repress Us/Them antipathies have the frontal
cortex written all over them. As we saw, a subliminal fifty-millisecond
exposure to the face of another can activate the amygdala, and if
exposure is long enough for conscious detection (about five hundred
milliseconds or more), the initial amygdala activation is followed by
PFC activation and amygdala damping; the more PFC activation,
particularly of the “cognitive” dlPFC, the more amygdala silencing. It’s
the PFC regulating discomfiting emotions.62
Behavioral data also implicate the frontal cortex. For example, for
the same degree of implicit racial prejudice (as shown with the IAT), the
bias is more likely to be expressed behaviorally in individuals with poor
frontal executive control (as shown with an abstract cognitive task).63
Chapter 2 introduced the concept of “cognitive load,” where a taxing
frontal executive task diminishes performance on a subsequent frontal
task. This occurs with Us/Them-ing. White subjects do better on certain
behavior tests when the tester is white as opposed to black; subjects
whose performance declines most dramatically in the latter scenario
show the greatest dlPFC activation when viewing other-race faces.64
The cognitive load generated by frontal executive control during
interracial interactions can be modulated. If white subjects are told,
417