down the spine and to a particular gland, helping to regulate its hormone
release; the pancreas and its secretion of insulin are an example (where
circulating glucose levels are the main regulator). Then there are weirdo
hormones secreted from unlikely places like the heart or gut, where the
brain regulates secretion only indirectly.
Hormones, like neurotransmitters, are made cheaply. They are
constructed in just a few biosynthetic steps from plentiful precursors—
either simple proteins or cholesterol.* Moreover, the body generates
multiple types of hormones from the same precursor. For example, the
numerous steroid hormones are all generated from cholesterol.
So far we’ve given short shrift to hormone receptors. They do the
same general job as do neurotransmitter receptors; there is a distinctive
receptor molecule for each type of hormone,* with a concave binding
domain whose shape is complementary to the shape of the hormone. To
trot out the same cliché as was used for neurotransmitters, a hormone fits
into its receptor like a key fits into a lock. And as with neurotransmitter
receptors, there’s no free lunch with hormone receptors. The various
steroid hormones are structurally similar. Thus, if you’re cheap at the
production end, you need subtle, fancy receptors that differentiate among
those similar hormones—you do not want receptors that confuse, say,
estrogen and testosterone.
Hormone/neurotransmitter similarities continue. Like
neurotransmitter receptors, a hormone receptor’s “avidity” for its
hormone can change. This means that the shape of the binding site
changes a bit, so that the hormone now fits more or less snugly, thus
increasing or decreasing the duration of the hormone’s effects. The
number of receptors for a particular hormone in a cell can also change,
altering the cell’s sensitivity to that hormone’s effects. The number of
receptors in a target cell can be as important as the levels of the hormone
itself, and there are endocrine diseases where normal levels of a hormone
are secreted but, because of a mutation in the hormone’s receptor, no
signal gets through. Hormone levels are akin to how loudly someone
speaks. Receptor levels are akin to the acuity with which ears detect that
voice.
Finally, receptors for a hormone typically occur in only a subset of
cells and tissues in the body, meaning that only those are responsive to
the hormone. For example, only tail cells contain receptors for thyroid
hormone when tadpoles are turning into frogs. Similarly, only some
709