More bad news: stress biases us toward selfishness. In one study
subjects answered questions about moral decision-making scenarios after
either a social stressor or a neutral situation.* Some scenarios were of
low emotional intensity (“In the supermarket you wait at the meat
counter and an elderly man pushes to the front. Would you complain?”),
others high intensity (“You meet the love of your life, but you are
married and have children. Would you leave your family?”). Stress made
people give more egoistic answers about emotionally intense moral
decisions (but not milder ones); the more glucocorticoid levels rose, the
more egoistic the answers. Moreover, in the same paradigm, stress
lessened how altruistic people claimed they’d be concerning personal
(but not impersonal) moral decisions.81
We have another contingent endocrine effect: stress makes people
more egoistic, but only in the most emotionally intense and personal
circumstances.* This resembles another circumstance of poor frontal
function—recall from chapter 2 how individuals with frontal cortical
damage make reasonable judgments about someone else’s issues, but the
more personal and emotionally potent the issue, the more they are
impaired.
Feeling better by abusing someone innocent, or thinking more about
your own needs, is not compatible with feeling empathy. Does stress
decrease empathy? Seemingly yes, in both mice and humans. A
remarkable 2006 paper in Science by Jeffrey Mogil of McGill University
showed the rudiments of mouse empathy—a mouse’s pain threshold is
lowered when it is near another mouse in pain, but only if the other
mouse is its cagemate.82
This prompted a follow-up study that I did with Mogil’s group
involving the same paradigm. The presence of a strange mouse triggers a
stress response. But when glucocorticoid secretion is temporarily
blocked, mice show the same “pain empathy” for a strange mouse as for
a cagemate. In other words, to personify mice, glucocorticoids narrow
who counts as enough of an “Us” to evoke empathy. Likewise in humans
—pain empathy was not evoked for a stranger unless glucocorticoid
secretion was blocked (either after administration of a short-acting drug
or after the subject and stranger interacted socially). Recall from chapter
2 the involvement of the anterior cingulate cortex in pain empathy. I bet
that glucocorticoids do some disabling, atrophying things to neurons
there.
129