some tasks than do adolescents and show more frontal cortical activation
at the time. Now find a task where, atypically, adolescents manage a
level of executive control equal to that of adults. In those situations
adolescents show more frontal activation than adults—equivalent
regulation takes less effort in a well-pruned adult frontal cortex.
That the adolescent frontal cortex is not yet lean and mean is
demonstrable in additional ways. For example, adolescents are not at
adult levels of competence at detecting irony and, when trying to do so,
activate the dmPFC more than do adults. In contrast, adults show more
activation in the fusiform face region. In other words, detecting irony
isn’t much of a frontal task for an adult; one look at the face is enough.5
What about white matter in the frontal cortex (that indirect measure
of myelination of axons)? Here things differ from the overproduce-then-
prune approach to gray matter; instead, axons are myelinated throughout
adolescence. As discussed in appendix 1, this allows neurons to
communicate in a more rapid, coordinated manner—as adolescence
progresses, activity in different parts of the frontal cortex becomes more
correlated as the region operates as more of a functional unit.6
This is important. When learning neuroscience, it’s easy to focus on
individual brain regions as functionally distinct (and this tendency
worsens if you then spend a career studying just one of them). As a
measure of this, there are two high-quality biomedical journals out there,
one called Cortex, the other Hippocampus, each publishing papers about
its favorite brain region. At neuroscience meetings attended by tens of
thousands, there’ll be social functions for all the people studying the
same obscure brain region, a place where they can gossip and bond and
court. But in reality the brain is about circuits, about the patterns of
functional connectivity among regions. The growing myelination of the
adolescent brain shows the importance of increased connectivity.
Interestingly, other parts of the adolescent brain seem to help out the
underdeveloped frontal cortex, taking on some roles that it’s not yet
ready for. For example, in adolescents but not adults, the ventral striatum
helps regulate emotions; we will return to this.7
Something else keeps that tyro frontal cortex off-kilter, namely
estrogen and progesterone in females and testosterone in males. As
discussed in chapter 4, these hormones alter brain structure and function,
including in the frontal cortex, where gonadal hormones change rates of
myelination and levels of receptors for various neurotransmitters.
155