view, there’s free will, you freely decide when to move your wrist, and
that readiness potential is a consequence of your decision. What’s the
five-hundred-millisecond delay, in that case? That’s the lag time between
the instant when the decision to move first occurs and when (a) attention
is then focused on the clock and (b) the position of the second hand is
interpreted. In other words, the supposed half-second lag is an artifact of
the experimental design, not a real thing. Other criticisms concerned the
ambiguity of feeling that you intend to move. Other criticisms are more
arcane than I can follow.
A very different interpretation of the finding was offered,
interestingly, by Libet. Yes, maybe your brain prepares to initiate a
behavior before there is conscious awareness of the decision, meaning
that your belief that you consciously chose to move is wrong. But in that
lag time is the potential to consciously choose to veto that action. In the
pithy words of V. S. Ramachandran (of mirror neuron speculation in
chapter 14), we may not have free will, but we have “free won’t.”19
Predictably, this intriguing counterinterpretation has fueled more
discussions, experiments, and counter-counterinterpretations. For us,
surveying different disputes concerning mitigated free will, this entire
debate is about the nature of a homunculus’s control panel. How many of
its buttons and switches and dials that go up to eleven are involved in
initiating a behavior versus halting it?
—
Thus a view of mitigated free will makes room for both biological
causation of behavior and free will, and all the discussions merely
concern where lines in the sand are drawn and how inviolate they are.
This prepares us to consider what I think is the most important line-
drawing debate.
“You Must Be So Smart” Versus “You Must Have
Worked So Hard”
Stanford psychologist Carol Dweck has done groundbreaking work
on the psychology of motivation. In the late 1990s she reported
something important. Kids do a task, take a test, something, where they
do it well. You then praise them in one of two ways—“What a great
596