to understand them (“Studying rat social behavior in a cage is like
studying dolphin swimming behavior in a bathtub” is an ethology
adage). They’d ask, What, objectively, is the behavior? What triggered
it? Did it have to be learned? How did it evolve? What is the behavior’s
adaptive value? Nineteenth-century parsons went into nature to collect
butterflies, revel in the variety of wing colors, and marvel at what God
had wrought. Twentieth-century ethologists went into nature to collect
behavior, revel in its variety, and marvel at what evolution had wrought.
In contrast to lab coat–clad behaviorists, ethologists tromped around
fields in hiking shoes and had fetching knobby knees.*
Sensory Triggers of Behavior in Some Other
Species
Using an ethological framework, we now consider sensory triggers of
behavior in animals.*2 First there’s the auditory channel. Animals
vocalize to intimidate, proclaim, and seduce. Birds sing, stags roar,
howler monkeys howl, orangutans give territorial calls audible for miles.
As a subtle example of information being communicated, when female
pandas ovulate, their vocalizations get higher, something preferred by
males. Remarkably, the same shift and preference happens in humans.
There are also visual triggers of behavior. Dogs crouch to invite play,
birds strut their plumage, monkeys display their canines menacingly with
“threat yawns.” And there are visual cues of cute baby–ness (big eyes,
shortened muzzle, round forehead) that drive mammals crazy, motivating
them to care for the kid. Stephen Jay Gould noted that the unsung
ethologist Walt Disney understood exactly what alterations transformed
rodents into Mickey and Minnie.*3
Then there are animals signaling in ways we can’t detect, requiring
creativity to interview an animal in its own language.4 Scads of
mammals scent mark with pheromones—odors that carry information
about sex, age, reproductive status, health, and genetic makeup. Some
snakes see in infrared, electric eels court with electric songs, bats
compete by jamming one another’s feeding echolocation signals, and
spiders identify intruders by vibration patterns on their webs. How about
this: tickle a rat and it chirps ultrasonically as its mesolimbic dopamine
system is activated.
84