The brain’s fault lines dividing Us from Them were shown in chapter
4’s discussion of oxytocin. Recall how the hormone prompts trust,
generosity, and cooperation toward Us but crappier behavior toward
Them—more preemptive aggression in economic play, more advocacy
of sacrificing Them (but not Us) for the greater good. Oxytocin
exaggerates Us/Them-ing.
This is hugely interesting. If you like broccoli but spurn cauliflower,
no hormone amplifies both preferences. Ditto for liking chess and
disdaining backgammon. Oxytocin’s opposing effects on Us and Them
demonstrate the salience of such dichotomizing.
Our depth of Us/Them-ing is supported further by something
remarkable—other species do it as well. Initially this doesn’t seem
profound. After all, chimps kill males from other groups, baboon troops
bristle when encountering each other, animals of all stripes tense at
strangers.
This simply reflects not taking kindly to someone new, a Them. But
some other species have a broader concept of Us and Them.4 For
example, chimp groups that have swollen in number might divide;
murderous animosities soon emerge between ex-groupmates.
Remarkably, you can show automatic Us/Them-ing in other primates
with a monkey equivalent of the IAT. In one study animals were shown
pictures of either members of their own or the neighboring group,
interspersed with positive things (e.g., fruit) or negative (e.g., spiders).
And monkeys looked longer at discordant pairings (e.g., group members
with spiders). These monkeys don’t just fight neighbors over resources.
They have negative associations with them—“Those guys are like yucky
spiders, but us, us, we’re like luscious tropical fruit.”*
Numerous experiments confirm that the brain differentially processes
images within milliseconds based on minimal cues about race or gender.5
Similarly, consider “minimal group” paradigms, pioneered in the 1970s
by Henri Tajfel of the University of Bristol. He showed that even if
groupings are based on flimsy differences (e.g., whether someone over-
or underestimated the number of dots in a picture), in-group biases, such
as higher levels of cooperation, still soon develop. Such prosociality is
about group identification—people preferentially allocate resources to
anonymous in-group individuals.
Merely grouping people activates parochial biases, no matter how
tenuous the basis of the grouping. In general, minimal group paradigms
392