RECIPROCAL ALTRUISM
S
o sometimes a chicken is an egg’s way of making another egg,
genes can be selfish, and sometimes we gladly lay down our lives
for two brothers or eight cousins. Does everything have to be about
competition, about individuals or groups of relatives leaving more copies
of their genes than the others, being more fit, having more reproductive
success?* Is the driving force of behavioral evolution always that
someone be vanquished?
Not at all. One exception is elegant, if specialized. Remember
rock/paper/scissors? Paper envelops rock; rock breaks scissors; scissors
cut paper. Would rocks want to bash every scissors into extinction? No
way. Because then all those papers would enwrap the rocks into
extinction. Each participant has an incentive for restraint, producing an
equilibrium.
Remarkably, such equilibriums occur in living systems, as shown in a
study of the bacteria Escherichia coli.29 The authors generated three
colonies of E. coli, each with a strength and a weakness. To simplify:
Strain 1 secretes a toxin. Strength: it can kill competitor cells. Weakness:
making the toxin is energetically costly. Strain 2 is vulnerable to the
toxin, in that it has a membrane transporter that absorbs nutrients, and
the toxin slips in via that transporter. Strength: it’s good at getting food.
Weakness: vulnerability to the toxin. Strain 3 doesn’t have the
transporter and thus isn’t vulnerable to the toxin, and it doesn’t make the
toxin. Strength: it doesn’t bear the cost of making the toxin and is
insensitive to it. Weakness: it doesn’t absorb as much nutrients. Thus,
destruction of strain 2 by strain 1 causes the demise of strain 1 thanks to
strain 3. The study showed that the strains could exist in equilibrium,
each limiting its growth.
Cool. But it doesn’t quite fit our intuitions about cooperation.
Rock/paper/scissors is to cooperation as peace due to nuclear weapons–
based mutually assured destruction is to the Garden of Eden.
Which raises a third fundamental, alongside individual selection and
kin selection: reciprocal altruism. “I’ll scratch your back if you scratch
346