person’s brain a second before the behavior happened? Now pull out to a
slightly larger field of vision, your next category of explanation, a little
earlier in time. What sight, sound, or smell in the previous seconds to
minutes triggered the nervous system to produce that behavior? On to the
next explanatory category. What hormones acted hours to days earlier to
change how responsive that individual was to the sensory stimuli that
trigger the nervous system to produce the behavior? And by now you’ve
increased your field of vision to be thinking about neurobiology and the
sensory world of our environment and short-term endocrinology in
trying to explain what happened.
And you just keep expanding. What features of the environment in
the prior weeks to years changed the structure and function of that
person’s brain and thus changed how it responded to those hormones and
environmental stimuli? Then you go further back to the childhood of the
individual, their fetal environment, then their genetic makeup. And then
you increase the view to encompass factors larger than that one
individual—how has culture shaped the behavior of people living in that
individual’s group?—what ecological factors helped shape that culture—
expanding and expanding until considering events umpteen millennia
ago and the evolution of that behavior.
Okay, so this represents an improvement—it seems like instead of
trying to explain all of behavior with a single discipline (e.g.,
“Everything can be explained with knowledge about this particular [take
your pick:] hormone/gene/childhood event”), we’ll be thinking about a
bunch of disciplinary buckets. But something subtler will be done, and
this is the most important idea in the book: when you explain a behavior
with one of these disciplines, you are implicitly invoking all the
disciplines—any given type of explanation is the end product of the
influences that preceded it. It has to work this way. If you say, “The
behavior occurred because of the release of neurochemical Y in the
brain,” you are also saying, “The behavior occurred because the heavy
secretion of hormone X this morning increased the levels of
neurochemical Y.” You’re also saying, “The behavior occurred because
the environment in which that person was raised made her brain more
likely to release neurochemical Y in response to certain types of stimuli.”
And you’re also saying, “. . . because of the gene that codes for the
particular version of neurochemical Y.” And if you’ve so much as
whispered the word “gene,” you’re also saying, “. . . and because of the
13