OH, WHY NOT: RELIGION
T
ime for a quick hit-and-run about religion before considering it in
the final chapter.
Theories abound as to why humans keep inventing religions. It’s
more than a human pull toward the supernatural; as stated in one review,
“Mickey Mouse has supernatural powers, but no one worships or would
fight—or kill—for him. Our social brains may help explain why children
the world over are attracted to talking teacups, but religion is much more
than that.” Why does religion arise? Because it makes in-groups more
cooperative and viable (stay tuned for more in the next chapter). Because
humans need personification and to see agency and causality when
facing the unknown. Or maybe inventing deities is an emergent by-
product of the architecture of our social brains.54
Amid these speculations, far more boggling is the variety of the
thousands of religions we’ve invented. They vary as to number and
gender of deities; whether there’s an afterlife, what it’s like, and what it
takes to enter; whether deities judge or interfere with humans; whether
we are born sinful or pure and whether sexuality changes those states;
whether the myth of a religion’s founder is of sacredness from the start
(so much so that, say, wise men visit the infant founder) or of a sybarite
who reforms (e.g., Siddhārtha’s transition from palace life to being the
Buddha); whether the religion’s goal is attracting new followers (say,
with exciting news—e.g., an angel visited me in Manchester, New York,
and gave me golden plates) or retaining members (we’ve got a covenant
with God, so stick with us). On and on.
There are some pertinent patterns amid this variation. As noted,
desert cultures are prone toward monotheistic religions; rain forest
dwellers, polytheistic ones. Nomadic pastoralists’ deities tend to value
war and valor in battle as an entrée to a good afterlife. Agriculturalists
invent gods who alter the weather. As noted, once cultures get large
enough that anonymous acts are possible, they start inventing moralizing
gods. Gods and religious orthodoxy dominate more in cultures with
frequent threats (war, natural disasters), inequality, and high infant
mortality rates.
304