organization, self-discipline, and Puritan work ethic to inflict bloodbaths.
He writes about the superiority of tribal warriors to Westernized armies,
e.g., describing how in the Anglo-Zulu War, Zulu spears were more
accurate than nineteenth-century British guns, and how the Brits won the
war not because they were superior fighters but because their logistical
sophistication allowed them to fight prolonged wars.
Like Keeley, Pinker concludes that warfare is nearly ubiquitous in
traditional cultures, reporting 10 to 30 percent of deaths as being war
related in New Guinea tribes such as the Gebusi and Mae Enga, and a 35
to 60 percent range for Waorani and Jivaro tribes in the Amazon. Pinker
estimates rates of death due to violence. Europe currently is in the range
of 1 death per 100,000 people per year. During the crime waves of the
1970s and 1980s, the United States approached 10; Detroit was around
45. Germany and Russia, during their twentieth-century wars, averaged
144 and 135, respectively. In contrast, the twenty-seven nonstate
societies surveyed by Pinker average 524 deaths. There are the Grand
Valley Dani of New Guinea, the Piegan Blackfoot of the American Great
Plains, and the Dinka of Sudan, all of whom in their prime approached
1,000 deaths, roughly equivalent to losing one acquaintance per year.
Taking the gold are the Kato, a California tribe that in the 1840s crossed
the finish line near 1,500 deaths per 100,000 people per year.
No tour of violence in indigenous cultures is complete without the
Yanomamö, a tribe living in the Brazilian and Venezuelan Amazon.
According to dogma, there is almost always raiding between villages; 30
percent of adult male deaths are due to violence; nearly 70 percent of
adults have had a close relative killed by violence; 44 percent of men
have murdered.61 Fun folks.
The Yanomamö are renowned because of Napoleon Chagnon, one of
the most famous and controversial anthropologists, a tough, pugnacious,
no-holds-barred academic brawler who first studied them in the 1960s.
He established the Yanomamös’ street cred with his 1967 monograph
Yanomamo: The Fierce People, an anthropology classic. Thanks to his
publications and his ethnographic films about Yanomamö violence, both
their fierceness and his are well-known tropes in anthropology.*
A central concept in the next chapter is that evolution is about
passing copies of your genes into the next generation. In 1988 Chagnon
published the remarkable report that Yanomamö men who were killers
had more wives and offspring than average—thus passing on more
312