Dutch family with an MAO-A gene mutation that eliminated the
protein.39 Thus serotonin isn’t broken down and accumulates in the
synapse. And counter to chapter 2’s predictions, the family was
characterized by varied antisocial and aggressive behaviors.
Mouse studies in which the MAO-A gene was “knocked out”
(producing the equivalent of the Dutch family’s mutation) produced the
same—elevated serotonin levels in the synapse and hyperaggressive
animals with enhanced fear responses.40
This finding, of course, concerned a mutation in MAO-A resulting in
the complete absence of the protein. Research soon focused on low-
activity MAO-A variants that produced elevated serotonin levels.*41
People with that variant averaged higher levels of aggression and
impulsivity and, when looking at angry or fearful faces, more activation
of the amygdala and insula and less activation of the prefrontal cortex.
This suggests a scenario of more fear reactivity and less frontal capacity
to restrain such fear, a perfect storm for reactive aggression. Related
studies showed decreased activation of frontal cortical regions during
various attentional tasks and enhanced anterior cingulate activity in
response to social rejection in such individuals.
So studies where serotonin breakdown products are measured in the
body, or where serotonin levels are manipulated with drugs, say that low
serotonin = aggression.42 And the genetic studies, particularly of MAO-
A, say high serotonin = aggression. What explains this discrepancy? The
key probably is that a drug manipulation lasts for a few hours or days,
while genetic variants have their effects on serotonin for a lifetime.
Possible explanations: (a) The low-activity MAO-A variants don’t
produce higher synaptic levels of serotonin all that consistently because
the 5HTT serotonin reuptake pump works harder at removing serotonin
from the synapse, compensating, and maybe even overcompensating.
There is evidence for this, just to make life really complicated. (b) Those
variants do produce chronically elevated serotonin levels in the synapse,
but the postsynaptic neurons compensate or overcompensate by
decreasing serotonin receptor numbers, thereby reducing sensitivity to all
that serotonin; there is evidence for that too. (c) The lifelong
consequences of differences in serotonin signaling due to gene variants
(versus transient differences due to drugs) produce structural changes in
the developing brain. There is evidence there as well, and in accordance
with that, while temporarily inhibiting MAO-A activity with a drug in an
252