Types of Neurotransmitters
So what is this mythic neurotransmitter molecule, released by action
potentials from the axon terminals of all of the hundred billion neurons?
Here’s where things get complicated, because there is more than one type
of neurotransmitter.
Why more than one? The same thing happens in every synapse,
which is that the neurotransmitter binds to its key-in-a-lock receptor and
triggers the opening of various channels that allow the ions to flow and
makes the inside of the spine a bit less negatively charged.
One reason is that different neurotransmitters depolarize to different
extents—in other words, some have more excitatory effects than others
—and for different durations. This allows for a lot more complexity in
information being passed from one neuron to the next.
And now to double the size of our palette, there are some
neurotransmitters that don’t depolarize, don’t increase the likelihood of
the next neuron in line having an action potential. They do the opposite
—they “hyperpolarize” the dendritic spine, opening different types of
channels that make the resting potential even more negative (e.g.,
shifting from –70 mV to –80 mV). In other words, there are such things
as inhibitory neurotransmitters. You can see how that has just made
things more complicated—a neuron with its ten thousand dendritic
spines is getting excitatory inputs of differing magnitudes from various
neurons, getting inhibitory ones from other neurons, and integrating all
of this at the axon hillock.
Thus there are lots of different classes of neurotransmitters, each
binding to a unique receptor site that is complementary to its shape. Are
there a bunch of different types of neurotransmitters in each axon
terminal, so that an action potential triggers the release of a whole
orchestration of signaling? Here is where we invoke Dale’s Principle,
named for Henry Dale, one of the grand pooh-bahs of the field, who in
the 1930s proposed a rule whose veracity forms the very core of each
neuroscientist’s sense of well-being: an action potential releases the same
type of neurotransmitter from all of the axon terminals of a neuron.
Therefore there will be a distinctive neurochemical profile to a particular
neuron—“Oh, that neuron is a neurotransmitter A–type neuron. And
what that also means is that the neurons that it talks to have
neurotransmitter A receptors on their dendritic spines.”*
691