time the volunteer remembers a few more, avoids repeating the nutmeg
incident. Now do it again and again.
This is more than a simple memory test. With repetition, subjects
notice that four of the items are fruits, four for cleaning, four spices, four
carbs. They come in categories. And this changes subjects’ encoding
strategy as they start clumping by semantic group—“Peaches. Apples.
Blueberries—no, I mean blackberries. There was another fruit, can’t
remember what. Okay, cornflakes, bread, doughnuts, muffins. Cumin,
nutmeg—argh, again!—I mean cinnamon, oregano . . .” And throughout,
the PFC imposes an overarching executive strategy for remembering
these sixteen factoids.*
The PFC is essential for categorical thinking, for organizing and
thinking about bits of information with different labels. The PFC groups
apples and peaches as closer to each other in a conceptual map than are
apples and toilet plungers. In a relevant study, monkeys were trained to
differentiate between pictures of a dog and of a cat. The PFC contained
individual neurons that responded to “dog” and others that responded to
“cat.” Now the scientists morphed the pictures together, creating hybrids
with varying percentages of dog and cat. “Dog” PFC neurons responded
about as much to hybrids that were 80 percent dog and 20 percent cat, or
60:40, as to 100 percent dog. But not to 40:60—“cat” neurons would
kick in there.41
The frontal cortex aids the underdog outcome, fueled by thoughts
supplied from influences that fill the rest of this book—stop, those aren’t
your cookies; you’ll go to hell; self-discipline is good; you’re happier
when you’re thinner—all giving some lone inhibitory motor neuron
more of a fighting chance.
Frontal Metabolism and an Implicit Vulnerability
This raises an important point, pertinent to the social as well as
cognitive functions of the frontal cortex.42 All this “I wouldn’t do that if
I were you”–ing by the frontal cortex is taxing. Other brain regions
respond to instances of some contingency; the frontal cortex tracks rules.
Just think how around age three, our frontal cortices learned a rule
followed for the rest of our lives—don’t pee whenever you feel like it—
52