violence, parental education, psychiatric illness, and IQ. This is a reliable
finding of large magnitude. The link between exposure to childhood
media violence and increased adult aggression is stronger than the link
between lead exposure and IQ, calcium intake and bone mass, or
asbestos and laryngeal cancer.
Two caveats: (a) there is no evidence that catastrophically violent
individuals (e.g., mass shooters) are that way because of childhood
exposure to violent media; (b) exposure does not remotely guarantee
increased aggression—instead, effects are strongest on kids already
prone toward violence. For them, exposure desensitizes and normalizes
their own aggression.*
Bullying
Being bullied is mostly another garden-variety childhood adversity,
with adult consequences on par with childhood maltreatment at home.42
There is a complication, though. As most of us observed, exploited,
or experienced as kids, bullying targets aren’t selected at random. Kids
with the metaphorical “kick me” signs on their backs are more likely to
have personal or family psychiatric issues and poor social and emotional
intelligence. These are kids already at risk for bad adult outcomes, and
adding bullying to the mix just makes the child’s future even bleaker.
The picture of the bullies is no surprise either, starting with their
disproportionately coming from families of single moms or younger
parents with poor education and employment prospects. There are
generally two profiles of the kids themselves—the more typical is an
anxious, isolated kid with poor social skills, who bullies out of
frustration and to achieve acceptance. Such kids typically mature out of
bullying. The second profile is the confident, unempathic, socially
intelligent kid with an imperturbable sympathetic nervous system; this is
the future sociopath.
There is an additional striking finding. You want to see a kid who’s
really likely to be a mess as an adult? Find someone who both bullies
and is bullied, who terrorizes the weaker at school and returns home to
be terrorized by someone stronger.43 Of the three categories (bully,
bullied, bully/bullied), they’re most likely to have prior psychiatric
problems, poor school performance, and poor emotional adjustment.
199