THE PRIMACY OF REASONING IN
MORAL DECISION MAKING
O
ne single fact perfectly demonstrates moral decision making being
based on cognition and reasoning. Have you ever picked up a law
textbook? They’re humongous.
Every society has rules about moral and ethical behavior that are
reasoned and call upon logical operations. Applying the rules requires
reconstructing scenarios, understanding proximal and distal causes of
events, and assessing magnitudes and probabilities of consequences of
actions. Assessing individual behavior requires perspective taking,
Theory of Mind, and distinguishing between outcome and intent.
Moreover, in many cultures rule implementation is typically entrusted to
people (e.g., lawyers, clergy) who have undergone long training.
Harking back to chapter 7, the primacy of reasoning in moral
decision making is anchored in child development. The Kohlbergian
emergence of increasingly complex stages of moral development is built
on the Piagetian emergence of increasingly complex logical operations.
They are similar, neurobiologically. Logical and moral reasoning about
the correctness of an economic or ethical decision, respectively, both
activate the (cognitive) dlPFC. People with obsessive-compulsive
disorder get mired in both everyday decision making and moral decision
making, and their dlPFCs go wild with activity for both.1
Similarly, there’s activation of the temporoparietal junction (TPJ)
during Theory of Mind tasks, whether they are perceptual (e.g.,
visualizing a complex scene from another viewer’s perspective), amoral
(e.g., keeping straight who’s in love with whom in A Midsummer Night’s
Dream), or moral/social (e.g., inferring the ethical motivation behind a
person’s act). Moreover, the more the TPJ activation, the more people
take intent into account when making moral judgments, particularly
when there was intent to harm but no actual harm done. Most important,
inhibit the TPJ with transcranial magnetic stimulation, and subjects
become less concerned about intent.2
479