This is logical self-interest. Knowing the hierarchical lay of the land
helps you navigate it better. But there’s more to that than just self-
interest. Those monkeys and corvids not only pay attention when there
are rank reversals in their group; they do the same when eavesdropping
on the neighbors. Same with us.11
What’s happening in our brains when we contemplate rank?12
Naturally, the prefrontal cortex weighs in. Frontal damage impairs skill
at recognizing dominance relations (along with recognizing kinship,
deception, or intimacy in faces). The vlPFC and dlPFC activate and
become coupled when we figure out dominance relations or look at a
dominant face, reflecting the combined affective and cognitive
components to the process. These responses are most pronounced when
considering someone of the opposite sex (which may reflect mating
goals more than mere academic interest about hierarchy).
Seeing a dominant face also activates the superior temporal gyrus
(STG, with its role in Theory of Mind) and increases its coupling to the
PFC—we’re more interested in what dominant individuals are
thinking.13 Moreover, individual “social status” neurons occur in the
monkeys. And as noted in chapter 2, contemplating an unstable hierarchy
does all of the above, plus activates the amygdala, reflecting the
unsettling effects of instability. Of course, though, none of this tells us
what we are contemplating at these times.
Your Brain and Your Own Status
Your own rank does logical things to your brain. In macaque
monkeys an increase in rank increases mesolimbic dopamine signaling.
And back to that rhesus monkey study showing that being in a larger
social group causes expansion and functional coupling of the STG and
PFC. The study also showed that the higher the rank attained within each
group, the greater the expansion and coupling. Consistent with that, a
study of mice showed that higher-ranking animals had stronger
excitatory inputs into the mouse equivalent of the (cognitive) dlPFC.14
I love these findings. As I said, in lots of social species, attaining
high rank is about sharp teeth and good fighting skills. But maintaining
the high rank is about social intelligence and impulse control: knowing
435