the fall of Rome, the deaths caused by Tamerlane, the annihilation of
Native Americans by Europeans, and the Atlantic slave trade.
Critics have questioned this—“Hey, stop using fudge factors to
somehow make World War II’s 55 million dead less than the fall of
Rome’s 8 million.” After all, 9/11’s murders would not have evoked only
half as much terror if America had 600 million instead of 300 million
citizens. But Pinker’s analysis is appropriate, and analyzing rates of
events is how you discover that today’s London is much safer than was
Dickens’s or that some hunter-gatherer groups have homicide rates that
match Detroit’s.
But Pinker failed to take things one logical step further—also
correcting for differing durations of events. Thus he compares the half
dozen years of World War II with, for example, twelve centuries of the
Mideast slave trade and four centuries of Native American genocide.
When corrected for duration as well as total world population, the top ten
now include World War II (number one), World War I (number three),
the Russian Civil War (number eight), Mao (number ten), and an event
that didn’t even make Pinker’s original list, the Rwandan genocide
(number seven), where 700,000 people were killed in a hundred days.*
This suggests both good and bad news. Compared with the past, we
are extraordinarily different in terms of whom we extend rights to and
feel empathy for and what global ills we counter. And things are better in
terms of fewer people acting violently and societies attempting to contain
them. But the bad news is that the reach of the violent few is ever
greater. They don’t just rage about events on another continent—they
travel there and wreak havoc. The charismatically violent inspire
thousands in chat rooms instead of a mob in their village. Like-minded
lone wolves more readily meet and metastasize. And the chaos once let
loose with a cudgel or machete occurs now with an automatic weapon or
bomb, with far more horrific consequences. Things have improved. But
that doesn’t mean they’re good.
Thus we now consider insights provided by this book that might
help.
620