Stress and glucocorticoids have inverted-U effects here as well.
Moderate, transient stress (or exposure to the equivalent glucocorticoid
levels) increases spine number in the hippocampus; sustained stress or
glucocorticoid exposure does the opposite.7 Moreover, major depression
or anxiety—two disorders associated with elevated glucocorticoid levels
—can reduce hippocampal dendrite and spine number. This arises from
decreased levels of that key growth factor mentioned earlier this chapter,
BDNF.
Sustained stress and glucocorticoids also cause dendritic retraction
and synapse loss, lower levels of NCAM (a “neural cell adhesion
molecule” that stabilizes synapses), and less glutamate release in the
frontal cortex. The more of these changes, the more attentional and
decision-making impairments.8
Recall from chapter 4 how acute stress strengthens connectivity
between the frontal cortex and motoric areas, while weakening frontal-
hippocampal connections; the result is decision making that is habitual,
rather than incorporating new information. Similarly, chronic stress
increases spine number in frontal-motor connections and decreases it in
frontal-hippocampal ones.9
Continuing the theme of the amygdala differing from the frontal
cortex and hippocampus, sustained stress increases BDNF levels and
expands dendrites in the BLA, persistently increasing anxiety and fear
conditioning.10 The same occurs in that way station by which the
amygdala talks to the rest of the brain (the BNST—bed nucleus of the
stria terminalis). Recall that while the BLA mediates fear conditioning,
the central amygdala is more involved in innate phobias. Interestingly,
stress seems not to increase the force of phobias or spine number in the
central amygdala.
There’s wonderful context dependency to these effects. When a rat
secretes tons of glucocorticoids because it’s terrified, dendrites atrophy
in the hippocampus. However, if it secretes the same amount by
voluntarily running on a running wheel, dendrites expand. Whether the
amygdala is also activated seems to determine whether the hippocampus
interprets the glucocorticoids as good or bad stress.11
Spine number and branch length in the hippocampus and frontal
cortex are also increased by estrogen.12 Remarkably, the size of neurons’
dendritic trees in the hippocampus expands and contracts like an
140