people more immediately afterward. Subjects primed with “loyalty”
(versus “equality”) become more biased toward their team in economic
games.32
Verbal primes also impact moral decision making.33 As every trial
lawyer knows, juries decide differently depending on how colorfully you
describe someone’s act. Neuroimaging studies show that more colorful
wording engages the anterior cingulate more. Moreover, people judge
moral transgressions more harshly when they are described as “wrong”
or “inappropriate” (versus “forbidden” or “blameworthy”).
Even Subtler Types of Unconscious Cuing
In the minutes before a behavior is triggered, subtler things than
sights and smells, gas pain, and choice of words unconsciously influence
us.
In one study, subjects filling out a questionnaire expressed stronger
egalitarian principles if there was an American flag in the room. In a
study of spectators at English football matches, a researcher planted in
the crowd slips, seemingly injuring his ankle. Does anyone help him? If
the plant wore the home team’s sweatshirt, he received more help than
when he wore a neutral sweatshirt or one of the opposing team. Another
study involved a subtle group-membership manipulation—for a number
of days, pairs of conservatively dressed Hispanics stood at train stations
during rush hour in predominately white Boston suburbs, conversing
quietly in Spanish. The consequence? White commuters expressed more
negative, exclusionary attitudes toward Hispanic (but not other)
immigrants.34
Cuing about group membership is complicated by people belonging
to multiple groups. Consider a famous study of Asian American women
who took a math test.35 Everyone knows that women are worse at math
than men (we’ll see in chapter 9 how that’s not really so) and Asian
Americans are better at it than other Americans. Subjects primed
beforehand to think about their racial identity performed better than did
those primed to think about their gender.
Another realm of rapid group influences on behavior is usually
known incorrectly. This is the “bystander effect” (aka the “Genovese
syndrome”).36 This refers to the notorious 1964 case of Kitty Genovese,
93